ACADEMIC CALENDAR
UNDERGRADUATE

....in pursuit of academic excellence

1

2023-2024

2

TABLE OF CONTENTS
4

Vision, Mision and Core Values

106

School of Pharmacy

5

Principal Officers

107

School of Nursing

6

Almanac

109

School of Public Health

109

Department of Environmental Health

10

GENERAL INFORMATION

11

Historical Note

112

FACULTY OF HUMANITIES

11

University Organisation

114

Department of African Languages & Literature

12

Student Financial Information

117

Chinese Studies Programme

12

Student Admissions

120

Department of English

14

Schedule of Fees

123

Department of French

15

General Academic Regulations

126

Department of History

20

General Education Courses

131

Department of Library & Information Studies

21

Regulations for Awards & Fellowships

142

Department of Media Studies

25

Examination Regulations

150

Department of Theology & Religious Studies

26

Academic Appeals and Procedures

159

Visual and Performing Arts Programme

28

FACULTY OF BUSINESS

168

FACULTY OF MEDICINE

29

Department of Accounting and Finance

169

Departments

31

Department of Management

169

Entry Requirements

32

Department of Marketing

34

Department of Tourism and Hospitality

172

FACULTY OF SCIENCE

174

Department of Biological Sciences

36

FACULTY OF EDUCATION

176

Department of Chemistry

37

Department of Lifelong and Community Develpopment

180

Department of Computer Science

40

Department of Educational Foundations

182

Department of Environmental Science

52

Department of Educational Technology

188

Department of Geology

52

Department of Family and Consumer Science

191

Department of Mathematics

53

Department of Languages & Social Sciences Education

195

Department of Physics

56

Department of Mathematics & Science Education

60

Department of Sport Science

200

FACULTY OF SOCIAL SCIENCES

62

Department of Primary Education

201

Department of Economics

202

Department of Law

70

FACULTY OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY

203

Department of Political & Administrative Studies

73

Department of Architecture and Planning

208

Department of Population Studies

82

Department of Civil Engineering

209

Department of Psychology

89

Department of Electrical Engineering

211

Department of Social Work

94

Department of Industrial Design & Technology

212

Department of Sociology

99

Department of Mechanical Engineering

214

Department of Statistics

104

FACULTY OF HEALTH SCIENCES

218

ACT AND STATUTES

105

School of Allied Health Professions

3

MISSION

The University provides quality education, research,
innovation and engagement for sustainable national
development and global impact.

					
					

CORE VALUES

VISION

By 2029 the University will be a distinctive centre of
academic excellence in Botswana, Africa and globally.

In undertaking it’s mission and in realising it’s vision the University will be
guided by the following core values which will define it’s behaviours and
underpin all it’s actions:
(a)

Professionalism
by upholding the highest professional and ethical standards.

(b)

Equity and Diversity
by ensuring equal opportunity and non-discrimination on the 				
basis of personal, religious, gender or other social characteristics.

(c)

Accountability
by ensuring transparent decision-making and open review as well as 			
the full participation of stakeholders in the development of the institution.

(d)

Creativity and Innovation
by upholding the spirit of free and critical thought, objective analysis, critical 		
appraisal and an open exchange of knowledge and ideas.

(e)
		

Botho
by ensuring that Botswana’s cultural values form an important part of the life 		
of the University.

4

P R I N C I P A L O GFEFNIECR EA LR SI N F O R M A T I O N

Chancellor
H.E. Tebelelo Mazile Seretse

Deputy Vice Chancellor
Teaching and Learning
Professor Georges-Ivo Ekosse

Chairman of Council
Mrs Tshisimogo M. Lekaukau

Vice Chancellor
Professor David Norris

Deputy Vice Chancellor
Research and Interprise
Professor Doreen Ramogola-Masire

Chief Operations Officer
Mr Dawid Katzke

5

Chief Finance Officer
Ms Peo Pillar

ALMANAC
SEMESTER ONE - 2023
JUNE

AUGUST

SENATE EXECUTIVE (Approval of Exam Results)

14 June

Supplementary Exam Registration Period		
Registration for Semester 1 Begins (All Students)

16 June - 14 July
16 June

JULY

Sir Seretse Khama Day			
01 July
Public Holiday				02 July 		
Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
06 July
Suplementary Exams				12-14 July
Last Day of Classes (Faculty of Medicine)		
14 July
President’s Day				17 July
Public Holiday				18 July
New Student Orientation and Registration
(New Undergraduates)				
19 - 21 July
Arrival and Registration (New Graduate Students)
19 - 21 July
DE-Registration Period			
19 - 21 July
Arrival (All Continuing Students)		
24 - 28 July
DE-New Student Orientation			
24 July
DE-New students Library Orientation		
24 July
New Graduate Student Orientation		
26 July
SENATE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
(Approval of Supplementary Exam Results)		

Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
Late Registration and Course Add/Drop Period Ends
University Research Committee 			
DE-Business Degrees Residential Session 1 (Level 3,4,5)
Classes begin (Faculty of Medicine) 		
First Year Student Banquet 			
DE-Business Degrees Residential Session 1 (Level 1&2)

03 August
04 August
04 August
05 - 06 August
07 August
11 August
12 - 13 August

SENATE 					16 August
DE-Business Degrees Test 1 (Level 3,4,5) 		
19 - 20 August
Last day to withdraw and receive a refund 		
25 August
DE Business Degrees Test 1 (Level 1 & 2) 		
26 - 27 August
CCE Board 					30 August

SEPTEMBER

Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
DE-Business Degrees Residential 2 (Level 3,4,5)

07 September
02 - 03 September

COUNCIL 					08 September
DE-Business Degrees Residential 2 (Level 1 & 2)
9 -10 September
DE-Diploma-Residential Session 2 and Test 		
16 - 17 September
Mid-Semester Break Begins 			
18 September

26 July

Final Supplementary Grades Published		
28 July
Winter Session Ends				
28 July
DE Business Degrees Introductory Session (All Levels)
29 - 30 July
DE-Diploma Residential Session 1			
29 July - 4 August
Registration for Semester 1 Ends (All Students)
30 July
Classes Begin				31 July
Late Registration and Course Add/Drop Period Begins 31 July

SENATE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE (Approval of
Graduation List) 				

20 September

Classes Resume after Mid Semester Break		
25 September
Botswana Day				30 September

SEMESTER TWO - 2024
JANUARY

University Opens 				
Classes Begin (Faculty of Medicine) 		
Supplementary Exams 			
Supplementary Exams Registration ends 		
DE-Registration period 			

SENATE 					21 February
08 January
08 January
15 - 17 January
17 January
20 - 21 January

MARCH

SENATE EXECUTIVE (Approval of Supplementary Exams) 24 January
DE Diplomas Residential Session 1 		
DE Business Degrees- Introductory Session
(Levels 1-5) 				
Registration for Semester 2 Ends (All Students)
Classes Begin 				
Late Registration and Course Add/Drop Period Begins

FEBRUARY

Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
University Research Committee 			
Late Registration and Course Add/Drop Period Ends
DE- Business Degrees-Residential
Session 1 (Level 3, 4, 5) 			
DE- Business Degrees Residential
Sessions 1 (level 1 & 2) 			
DE-Business Degrees Test 1 (Level 3,4,5) 		

Last day to withdraw and receive a refund 		
23 February
DE-Business Degrees Test 1 (Level 1 & 2) 		
24 - 25 February
Academic Policy Review and Planning
Committee 				29 February

DE-Diplomas Residential Session 2 and Test 		

27 - 28 January
27 - 28 January
28 January
29 January
29 January

COUNCIL 					8 March

01 February
02 February
02 February

DE-Business Degrees Residential
Session 2 (Level 3, 4, 5) 			
DE Business Degrees Residential
Session 2 (Level 1 & 2) 			
Mid-Semester Break Begins 			
Classes Resume after Semester Break 		
Semester 1 Class Schedule Information due 		
Good Friday (Public holiday) 			

03 - 04 February

APRIL

10 - 11 February
17 - 18 February

6

02 - 03 March

DE-Business Degrees Test 2 (Level 3, 4, 5) 		
Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
Easter Monday (Public holiday) 			

9 - 10 March
16 - 17 March
18 March
25 March
28 March
29 March

30 - 31 April
04 April
1 April

OCTOBER

Public Holiday 				
02 October
Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
05 October
University Research Committee 			
06 October
Semester 2 Class Schedule Information due 		
06 October
DE-Business Degrees Test 2 (Level 3,4,5) 		
07 - 08 October
DE-Business Degrees Test 2 (Level 1 & 2) 		
14 - 15 October
Graduation Ceremony 			
19 - 20 October
DE-Business Degrees Residential session 3 (All Levels)
21 - 22 October
DE-Diploma residential session 3 			
28 – 29 October
DE-Diploma Examinations 		
30 October - 3 November

SENATE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 		

12 December

All Final Grades Published 			
Registration for Semester 2 Begins (All Students)
Supplementary Exams Registration begins 		
University Closes for Christmas 			
Last Day of Classes (Faculty of Medicine) 		

13 December
14 December
14 December
15 December
22 December

NOVEMBER

SENATE 					 1 November
Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
02 November
COUNCIL 					03 November
DE-Business Degrees Examination 			
Last Day of Classes 				
Reading Days (No Classes, Assessments,
Examinations Held) 				
Final Examination Period Begins 			
Final Examinations Period Ends 			
Semester 1 Ends 				

6 - 12 November
10 November
11 - 12 November
13 November
24 November
24 November

DECEMBER

Faculty Boards /School Boards of Examiners/CCE
Examiners Boards 			
Final Grades Due by 6 pm 		
Registration (Faculty of Medicine)

01 - 07 December
08 December
11 - 15 December

University Research Committee 			
DE-Business Degrees Test 2 (Level 1 & 2) 		

5 April
13 - 14 April

COUNCIL 					07 June

SENATE 					17 April
DE-Business Degrees Residential Session 3 (All Levels) 20 - 21 April
DE-Diploma Residential Session 3 20 - 21 April
DE-Diploma Examination 22 - 26 April

MAY

Labour Day 				
DE-Business Degrees Examination 			
Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
Ascension Day 				
Last Day of Classes 				
Readings Days (No Classes, Assessments,
Examinations Held) 				
Final Examination Period Begins 			
Final Examinations Period Ends 			
Semester 2 Ends 				
Winter Session begins 				

01 May
02 May - 08 May
04 May
9 May
10 May

14 June

SENATE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 			

19 June

All Final Grades Published 			
Registration begins (All Students) 		
Supplementary Registration Period Begins 		
Last Day of Classes (Faculty of Medicine) 		

19 June
20 June
20 June
24 June

JULY

Sir Seretse Khama Day 				
Academic Policy Review and Planning Committee
Supplementary Exams 			
President’s Day 				
Public Holiday 				
Winter Session Ends 				

11 - 12 May
13 May
24 May
24 May
27 May

JUNE

Faculty Boards/CCE Board of Examiners
(Examination Results) 				

Final Grades Due by 6pm 			

10 - 13 June

7

01 July
06 July
12 – 14 July
15 July
16 July
26 July

ALMANAC
DABS ALMANAC – 2023-2024
SEMESTER ONE – 2023
Supplementary Exam Registration 		
DABS Supplementary Exams 			
DABS Registration Period 			
DABS Classes Begin 				
DABS Late Registration Period Begins 		
DABS Last Day to Add/Drop a Course 		
Last day to withdraw and receive a refund 		
DABS Mid-Semester Break 			
DABS Classes Resume after Mid Semester Break

16 June - 14 July
12 - 14 July
16 June – 30 July
31 July
31 July
04 August
25 August
18 September
25 October

DABS Classes End 				
DABS Examination Days 11 - 12, 			
Final Grades Due by 6 pm 			
All Final Grades Published 			
Registration Period Begins 			
Supplementary Exams Registration begins 		

10 November
18 - 19 November
08 December
14 December
15 December
15 December

SEMESTER TWO – 2024
Supplementary Exams 			
Supplementary Exams Registration ends 		
Registration Period Ends 			
Classes Begin 				
Late Registration and Course Add/Drop Period Begins
Late Registration and Course Add/Drop Period Ends
Last day to withdraw and receive a refund 		
Mid-Semester Break Begins 			
DABS Classes Resume after Mid-Semester Break
DABS Classes End 				

15 - 17 January
17 January
28 January
29 January
29 January
02 February
23 February
18 March
25 March
10 May

DABS Examination Period 11 – 12, 			
DABS Examiners Board 				
DABS Grades Due by 6pm 			
All Final Grades Published 			
Registration Period Begins 			
Supplementary Registration Period Begins 		
Supplementary Exams 			

18 - 19 May
29 May
14 June
19 June
20 June
20 June
12 – 14 July

8

....in pursuit of academic excellence

9

GENERAL INFORMATION

10

GENERAL
Historical Note
The opening of the University of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland (UBBS) on
January 1st 1964 was the outcome of an agreement reached in mid-1962 between the
High Commission Territories and the Oblate of Mary Immaculate of Pius XII Catholic
University, Roma, Lesotho. Pius XII College of Roma, 35 kilometres from Maseru, was
itself the product of the desire for an institution of higher learning for Africans by the
Catholic hierarchy in Southern Africa. It opened its doors to students in 1946, with five
students and five priest-lecturers. In 1950, it was taken over by the Catholic Order of the
Oblate of Mary Immaculate. By 1963 there were 180 students, both men and women,
and several buildings, including a science block, refectory, administration complex and
workshops. Courses followed at Pius XII College were taught and examined under a
special relationship entered into in 1955 with the University of South Africa, which
awarded students its degrees and diplomas in Arts, Science, Commerce and Education.
Pius XII College experienced difficulties over finance for the expanding institution and
over racial restrictions on student residence required by the University of South Africa.
Negotiations with the High Commission Territories to transform the University College
into a fully fledged University were therefore initiated during 1962. On June 13, 1963,
a deed of cession and indemnity was signed by the Oblates and the High Commissioner
of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland. The new University, with Ford Foundation
and British Government funds, purchased the assets of the Roma Campus for an
indemnity of half of its value, in exchange for guarantees of a continuing Catholic
presence on the campus.
UBBS became UBLS (The University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland) in 1966 on
the Independence of Botswana and Lesotho. From a total of 188 students in 1964,
the University grew to 402 students in 1970, of whom 145 were from Lesotho, with
lesser numbers from Swaziland, Botswana, Rhodesia, South Africa and elsewhere.
UBLS conferred its first degrees in April 1st 1967 after a transitional period during
which the former Pius XII College students continued to take University of South Africa
degrees. UBLS offered its own four-year undergraduate degrees and diplomas in Arts
(including Economics and Administration), Science and Education, with Law students
following a five-year degree, including two years tuition at the University of Edinburgh.
Students seeking specialised degrees in Medicine, Engineering, etc, proceeded to other
universities after completing Part I (Years 1 and 2) studies in Science. The number of
academic staff grew from 31 in 1964 to 78 in 1970. Staff members were recruited from
many countries, but the University pursued an active localisation policy from 1971.
UBLS was equally funded by the Governments of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland,
but had comparatively little presence in Botswana and Swaziland in the first phase of
its existence during 1964-1970. The only substantial ‘devolution’ of UBLS from Roma
Campus came towards the end of this phase of University development and was the
association of the Swaziland Agricultural College of Luyengo with the University, as
the Swaziland Agricultural College and University Centre. This College, built for the
Swaziland Government with Oxfam and ‘Freedom from Hunger’ funds, had been opened
in 1966. In 1970, the Swaziland Government agreed to hand over the College to UBLS,
together with the Research Division of the Ministry of Agriculture and its experimental
station at Malkerns near Luyengo. From 1972, these together constituted a new Faculty
of Agriculture. In Botswana, the UBLS presence was limited to the energies of the
Division of Extra Mural Services and the School of Education, and a small Short-Course
Centre built during 1969. With independence, the three countries began to take a
closer look at the colonial inheritance of education, including their joint University,
and began to identify the role of UBLS in higher and middle-level training. A series of
academic planning reports for UBLS produced after 1966 culminated in the second
Alexander Report of 1970, which combined, ‘The major recommendations of previous
reports for the development of university campuses in each country and the unified
development of higher education and vocational and teacher training’. The report
recommended that Part I studies begin in Botswana and Swaziland, with eventual
division of Part II (Year 2 and 4) studies among the campuses, and the consideration of
‘polytechnic’ arrangements for technical and vocational courses. The second Alexander
Report was accepted by the University and by the Governments of Botswana, Lesotho
and Swaziland, at a meeting in October 1970, on the Luyengo campus. It heralded the
second phase (1971-1976) of UBLS development. Plans were immediately drawn up to
spend about one million Rand for campus development in each of the three countries.
In Botswana and Swaziland there were to be campuses respectively within the capital
of Gaborone, and at Kwaluseni adjacent to the national high school of Matsapha.
Funds were obtained from the United States, British, Canada, Danish and Netherlands
Governments as well as from the Governments of UBLS countries, the Anglo American
Corporation and other bodies. Teaching of Part I began and temporary accommodation
at Gaborone and Kwaluseni campuses became fully operational in 1971. In Swaziland,
the William Pitcher and Nazarene Teacher Training Colleges were affiliated to the
local university centre, as were the Francistown, Lobatse and Serowe Teacher Training
Colleges in Botswana. Plans for specialised Part II and professional studies on each
campus were dramatically advanced by the devolution of Part II Humanities teaching
to Gaborone and Kwaluseni, as well as Roma, in 1974. Further negotiations between the

INFORMATION

three governments and the University resulted in agreement on June 11, 1975, known
as the ‘Luyengo Package’ which was accepted by all parties.
Following student unrest at Roma, and strained relations between the central UBLS
administration and the Lesotho government over implementation of the ‘Luyengo
Package’, the Roma campus was precipitately withdrawn from UBLS and constituted
as the National University of Lesotho (NUL) on Monday October 20, 1975. This occurred
at a time when a working group on further devolution of UBLS into three University
Colleges was preparing its report for the Council of the University. The nationalization of
all facilities, monies and files in Lesotho meant the central administration of UBLS could
operate with only limited effectiveness from premises at Malkerns during 1975-1976,
and considerable autonomy was devolved onto the Botswana and Swaziland campuses.
Students from Botswana and Swaziland were immediately withdrawn from the Roma
campus on the appropriation of all UBLS property in Lesotho by NUL. Part II teaching for
students was resumed within a few months in Botswana (Economics and Social Studies
and Science) and in Swaziland (Law). Following the acceptance of the Hunter Report
and further negotiations between the University and the Governments of Botswana
and Swaziland, the University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland (UBLS) became the
University of Botswana and Swaziland (UBS), with two constituent University Colleges
of Botswana and Swaziland (UCB and UCS respectively). The new University structure
was dedicated to maintaining and intensifying service to the ideals previously laid out
for UBLS by the Botswana and Swaziland Governments. The ideals were summed up
in the Second National Development Plan of Swaziland, which saw UBS as playing
an ‘increasingly important role in National Development not only through providing
the educated manpower needed, but also through (the university’s) great potential as
a focus for the academic and cultural activities of the nation.’ The ideals were also
identified as the beginning of the devolution phase of UBLS development into Botswana
and Swaziland by the then Chancellor, Seretse Khama, in his graduation speech in
May 1970, on the Luyengo campus. “The University must be a committed institution,
committed to the fulfillment of the ambitions and aspirations of the communities it
was created to serve. One of these is rapid development, another is nonracialism, and
the third is simply pride in ourselves and in our past, which in turn would lead to a
greater degree of self-confidence, which is one of the very basic ingredients of true
independent nationhood.” The years 1976 and 1982 saw both constituent Colleges of
the University develop their physical resources and their academic programmes in close
cooperation with each other, with a view to the eventual establishment of separate
national universities on the 1st July, 1982.
The formal inauguration of the University of Botswana was performed on 23rd October
1982 by His Excellency Sir Ketumile Masire, President of the Republic of Botswana. The
University of Botswana and Swaziland continued to cooperate for a further six months
to 31 December 1982 for the purpose of examining and awarding degrees, diplomas
and certificates. In terms of an agreement between the Governments of Botswana and
Swaziland, the National Universities in Botswana and Swaziland were to continue to
exchange students and to cooperate in certain areas and to that end a consultative
machinery set up to advise on how best to cooperate.

The University Organisation
The University of Botswana was established on 1st July 1982 by an Act of Parliament.
The University campus consists of that part of the two former universities (UBLS and
UBS – see Historical Note above) which was situated in Botswana and was sometimes
referred to as the Gaborone Campus. The University is closely involved in the national
development process of Botswana. In this regard the special functions of the University
are to engage in improving the quality and in expanding the quantity of the human
resources needed for development, and to act as the repository of the collective
knowledge and experience of the nation and the world. The first of these functions is
fulfilled through the teaching programmes offered by the University and its affiliated
institutions, leading to the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates. The second
function is carried out individually and collectively by the staff of the University and
its affiliated institutions, through the research and development, consultancies and
information services which they undertake. Like any other complex organisation, the
University has established certain patterns of authority and specialisation, systems, and
rules of procedure, in order to perform its functions in an orderly and effective manner.
These regulate day-today work within the University.

The Council
The governing body of the University is the Council, which has the ultimate responsibility
for the work and progress of the University towards the achievement of its goals. Its
membership includes leading figures from the national and international community

11

GENERAL

INFORMATION

as well as senior personnel within the University. The Council has wide powers to make
statutes, lay down policy, approve programmes and plans, and to establish working
procedures governing the organisational life of the University. It also provides and
controls the resources required to support both the academic activities and the physical
development and maintenance of the University. But as a mainly policy-making body
the Council cannot, and should not, be engaged in the day-to-day administration
of the University. Clearly it could not carry out efficiently all its wide responsibilities
by itself. On academic matters it consults the Senate; on many other matters, while
retaining overall control and responsibility, it delegates much of the detailed work to
the officers and committees.
The Senate
The chief academic authority of the University is the Senate, whose membership
includes the VC, DVCs, Faculty Deans, Faculty representatives and Heads of academic
support units as well as student representatives. Under the Council, the Senate has the
responsibility for the general control and direction of teaching and research activities,
examinations, the conferment of degrees and award of diplomas and certificates.
Much of its statutory authority is exercised through its approval and, from time to
time, amendment of various sets of academic regulations, all of which are published
for general information in the later sections of this Calendar. They include general
and special academic regulations, admissions and examination procedures, degree
structures, programmes of study, syllabuses, library regulations, etcetera. Regulations
in any organisation may appear to restrict freedom of action, but are necessary for
the orderly conduct of affairs. Additionally, in a University context, the regulations are
the means by which the Senate ensures that the academic standards and quality of
teaching are acceptable not only to the University and the nation, but also to the wider
academic community of the world. Senate also delegates much of its detailed work to
committees, reviewing the recommendations they bring forward for its approval.
Faculties and Departments
Below the level of the Vice Chancellor’s office, the University is divided broadly into three
types of specialised work: academic affairs, finance and administration, and student
affairs. The academic side is represented by the Senate, Faculties, Schools, Departments
and Institutes. Specialisation and the best use of staff expertise are achieved on the
basis of the division of the academic areas into departments. Each department has a
special focus, involving it in teaching and research in particular subjects or disciplines.
These departments are responsible for the day-to-day teaching and research work of
the University, and they formulate the programmes of study. A number of departments
and similar or related disciplines are grouped together to constitute a Faculty. At present
there are eight established faculties: Business, Education, Engineering and Technology,
Humanities, Science, Social Sciences, Health Sciences, Medicine and a School of
Graduate Studies. The Faculty of Health Sciences was formally established on 1 April
2006. Currently, the Faculty of Medicine is the newest faculty and it includes the School
of Nursing, the School of Allied Health Professions and the School of Public Health. In
general, departments in the same faculty work closely together in offering Degree,
Diploma and Certificate Programmes. In many cases there is a similar cooperation
between Faculties. Faculties are headed by Deans, who represent the Faculty on other
bodies and who have general responsibility for coordinating the work of the Faculty.
Faculties work through their Faculty Boards and a variety of committees established by
the Boards. Proposals from departments are brought to Faculty Boards for discussion
and may then be submitted to Senate and, when necessary, to Council. Decisions and
directions are then transmitted back to departments through the same channels.

Student Financial Information

Student Financial Procedures
2.21 Reporting to the Finance Office is an integral part of registration; until financial
clearance has been obtained from the Finance Office, registration will be deemed
to be incomplete.
2.22 All fees must be paid by the first day of the semester. Sponsored students have to
produce satisfactory evidence of the award of sponsorship.
2.23 Where a scholarship includes a student’s personal allowance, the University may
advance up to one half of it, at its discretion. If a cherub is not honored, a
student may be asked to cancel registration immediately.
2.24 Scholarships administered by the University shall be awarded on the understanding
that any monies received by the University and disbursed to or on behalf of the
student, will be repayable by the student, should he or she withdraw during the
course of the academic year without permission of the University.
2.25 Students who damage University property or equipment will be charged the cost
of repair or replacement of the item(s). An annual caution fee is held to cover any

such charges which are not otherwise settled upon demand. Before registering
for a subsequent academic session, the caution fee must be restored. Unless
an account for damage is settled immediately a student may be requested to
withdraw.
2.26 Should a student leave the University without having paid the prescribed fees,
including fines due, or without returning any library books, the academic results
and transcripts and/or final certification for which a student is otherwise
qualified, shall be withheld until such fees, library books or University property
have been recovered.
2.27 Any registered student who decides to withdraw from the University must
give notice of his/her intention to do so in writing to the relevant Head of
Department and Dean’s Office. All students shall be eligible to get 100% refund
if they withdraw within the first 30 days each semester. Any registered student
who withdraws from the University after the first 30 days shall be eligible for
only 50% of tuition fee refund up to mid semester and any student withdrawing
from the University after mid semester break of each semester shall not be
eligible for any refund of fees.
2.28 Once a student has accepted an offer to reside in any hostel and has been duly
registered for accommodation,(s)he shall remain so registered for the rest of the
semester. Application or request to move out of the hostel during the semester
shall not be acceded to.
Where a student moves out of the hostel on their own accord no refund of
accommodation fees shall be made irrespective of the period of hostel
occupation.
Where a student is allocated hostel space during the course of the semester,
accommodation fees shall be charged on a pro rata basis.
Student Admissions
Prospective undergraduate applicants, are to access the University of Botswana website
www.ub.bw, to complete and submit the application form on-line. For graduate
programmes, admission applications are made direct to The Dean, School of Graduate
Studies. It must be stressed that application for a Government or other scholarship
tenable at the University does not take the place of application to the University for
admission. However, prospective applicants need not wait until they are assured of a
scholarship before applying for admission to the University; the two applications can
go forward in parallel. Similarly, students are free to simultaneously apply to other
universities or educational institutions. For the admission application to be processed,
all the forms and other requirements outlined in the Admission Regulations must be
submitted.

Fees and Scholarships

It should be noted that statutory fees, and expenses do not include the costs of books,
notebooks, stationery, personal laboratory equipment, medical attention, repair of
clothes, dry-cleaning and living expenses. The cost of travel to and from the University
is entirely the student’s responsibility. Many governments are prepared to offer
scholarships or grants to prospective students; information about these scholarships
should be obtained from the appropriate authority in the country concerned. Some
industrial trusts and corporations also offer awards, usually through the appropriate
government, and information about these should be sought accordingly. Although
every effort will be made to ensure that no student is deprived of the opportunity for
study by lack of money, acceptance by the University does not imply that a scholarship
is available.
Bank Payments and Procedures
1. Existing Students
1.1 University students may pay fees at any branch of First National Bank of Botswana
to University of Botswana bank account number 57110069096. To pay into this
account a University student needs a valid student ID . The University accounting
system has been interfaced with that of the bank so that immediately upon
payment a student will be un-blocked for registration at the University. After
paying your fees you may proceed directly to your Faculty for academic
registration [i.e. University students who pay fees in this manner need not queue
again at Financial Services department for financial registration/clearance].
For international payments, students can pay into our Standard Chartered Bank
Account details of which are as follows:
Account Name: University of Botswana
Account Number: 0100110109600
Branch code: 662167
Swift code: SCHBBWGX

12

GENERAL
Copies of proof of payment, (with full student names and student number noted on
them) must immediately be sent to the attention Manager Student debtors at fax
number 00 267 3959 390 or e-mailed to Studentpayments@mopipi.ub.bw
1.2. Students who are in receipt of sponsorship letters must deliver copies of the same
and get financial clearance from Student Debtors office before proceeding to
their respective Faculties to complete their registration.
2. Prospective Students
2.1 Candidates or Prospective students who wish to apply for admission may pay
application fees at the following banks:
• First National Bank of Botswana to University of Botswana bank account number
62130787601
• Barclays Bank of Botswana to University of Botswana bank account number 3761645
• Standard Chartered Bank of Botswana to University of Botswana bank account
number 0100110109604
For payment of application fees from outside Botswana
Please deposit the fees into the following account; Account name, University of
Botswana; Account number, 0100110109604; Branch code, 662167; Swift Code,
SCHBBWGX2.2 A copy of the deposit slip [with your name & ID written on] should
be attached to application forms when these are submitted or sent to the Admissions
Section of the Academic Services Department. Applicants who pay fees in this manner
need not queue at University Cashier’s Office for payment before submitting application
forms. This method of payment also avoids acquisition of post office Postal Orders for
onward transmission to the University as a form of payment.
Travel and Residence
International students accepted to the University of Botswana are required to be in
possession of valid travel documents, visas and residence permits (where applicable) to
enter the country.
Basic Entrance Qualifications
1. Admission Regulations
1.1 Qualifications for Entry
1.1.1 The normal basic requirements for entrance to Undergraduate Degree and Diploma
programmes shall be the Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education
(BGCSE) with a grade C or better in English Language, but other qualifications
may be accepted on their merit as alternatives. Entry into the Science Degree
programmes shall be on the basis of BGCSE Science and Mathematics aggregates
and a grade D or better in English Language or equivalents. (For further details
see General Academic Regulations covering the programme in question.)
1.1.3 It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that all examination results and
other documents are forwarded to the Admissions Office before the deadline.

INFORMATION

1.2.5

In addition, an applicant who has attended another university or other
postsecondary institution must submit a certificate of good conduct, and a
transcript, duly signed by the competent officer of the issuing University.
1.2.6 Unless an applicant is notified to the contrary, the closing date for the submission
of application forms and accompanying documents will be the last working day
of March immediately preceding the commencement of the academic year for
which application is made. (The Academic Year starts in August.)
1.27 Graduate Degrees
1.271 Application procedures are as for undergraduate study (1.2.1 to 1.2.6 above).
1.272 Admission to a programme leading to a graduate degree must be approved by
the School of Graduate Studies on the authority of Senate.
1.273 On receipt of the completed application forms, the Dean of the School of Graduate
Studies shall send one copy to the relevant Head of Department who shall
submit his/ her recommendation to the Departmental Board for consideration.
The Board shall in turn forward the application with its recommendation to
Senate via the Graduate Studies Board.
1.274 Permission to pursue a graduate degree programme as a part-time student
shall be granted only to persons who can show that they are able to devote a
reasonable proportion of their time to the work prescribed.
1.275 Registration for Master’s Degree programmes by coursework and dissertation
shall normally take place at the beginning of the first semester of each academic
year but may, in special circumstances, and on the recommendation by the
Graduate Studies Board, take place at the beginning of the semester following
that in which the application is approved by the Senate.
1.276 MPhil and PhD applicants may be accepted and registered anytime during the
Academic Year with permission of the relevant department/unit.
1.3 Notification of Acceptance
1.31 The Admissions Office for undergraduate applicants and the School of Graduate
Studies for graduate applicants shall notify each applicant whether or not he/
she has been accepted for admission to the University.
1.32 No applicant should come to the University of Botswana unless he or she has
received a formal offer of admission.
1.4 Conditions of Acceptance
1.41 Acceptance of an applicant by the University of Botswana shall be on the
understanding that the applicant undertakes to be bound by and to observe the
policies and regulations of the University.
1.42 Academic Transcripts
An official transcript will be provided to each student free at the conclusion of his/
her studies. Extra copies thereafter shall be issued at a cost to be determined by the
University from time to time.

1.1.4 Candidates who are awaiting the issue of a certificate following the results of an
examination shall normally be required to provide legal proof of qualification
from an examining body, stating the level of the subjects passed, before an
offer of admission is issued and registration to programmes of the University
is effected. Applicants admitted and registered under this provision shall not
normally be permitted to register for, or write final year examinations before
submitting the certificate.
1.2 Admission Applications
1.2.1 Unless other specific instructions are given, applications are availed, completed
and submitted on line through the “STUDY AT UB” link on the University of
Botswana Website: www.ub.bw
1.2.2 Each Application shall consist of:
i) The online application form to be completed by the prospective applicant.
ii) Certified copy of Omang (for citizens) or Passport (non-citizens)
iii) Certified copy of Secondary School certificate
iv) Academic trascripts and post school certificates
v) Appropriate application fee.
1.2.3 When submitting the application form online, the applicant must upload the
receipt for non- refundable application fee.
1.2.4 Applications will not be considered until the University has received the
application form, relevant academic transcript(s) and certificate(s), application
fee receipt and Omang/Passport.

13

GENERAL

INFORMATION

Schedule of Fees 2023-2024

*PLEASE NOTE THAT THE TUITION FEE AT UNIVERSITY OF BOTSWANA IS
DETERMINED BY THE NUMBER OF CREDITS THAT ONE ENROLLS FOR. THE ANNUAL
TUITION FEES BELOW ARE THEREFORE ESTIMATES ONLY BASED ON MINIMUM
LOAD OF 30 CREDITS FOR UNDERGRADUATES AND 24 CREDITS FOR POST

GRADUATE STUDENTS.
UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

FEES IN PULA

				ANNUAL

Science & Engineering
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students			
Other Faculties
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students			

* Based on normal load of 30 credits for undergraduates, 24 credits for postgraduate
students and 8 credits for DABS
**Students are kindly advised to note that with this schedule of fees, there is an
additional list of fees, (excursion fees), that shall be levied over and above the normal
tuition fee for each course listed on pages 3 and 4.

37 200
74 700

FOR ONE CREDIT

PROGRAMMES			

1240
2490

PART-TIME PROGRAMME
Diplomas( DABS)
		
(Excluding cost of book)

28 200
56 100

940
1870

FEES 2023 / 24

4040

International students fee
(Undergraduate/Post-graduate)

Diplomas
Science & Engineering
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

37 200
74 700

1 240
2 490

Other Faculties
Resident Students
		
Non-Resident Students 		

28 200
56 400

940
1880

Bachelors
Science & Engineering
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

37 200
74 700

1 240
2 490

School of Medicine
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

41 400
82 500

1 380
2 750

Other Faculties
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

28 200
56 100

940
1870

Postgraduate Programmes
Postgraduate Diplomas
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

30 300
45 600

1010
1 520

Masters Programmes
Science & Engineering
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

Late Registration Fee/Day
(Returning Students)
		
(maximum 14 days)

33 120
49 680

1 380
2 070

Late Registration Fee/Day (New Students)
(maximum 14 days)

120

MBA
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

37 920
57 120

1 580
2 380

Transcript Fee

		

50

Identity Card Fee

		

70

School of Medicine
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

10 000
15 000

250
375

Other Faculties
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

26 160
39 360

1 090
1 640

MPhil Science & Engineering
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

33 120
49 680

1 380
2 070

Other MPhils (Other Faculties)
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

26 160
39 360

1 090
1 640

PhD Science & Engineering
Resident and African Students 		
Non-Resident Students 		

13 200
19 680

550
820

Administration Fee
Students from Africa 		
Students from other Continents

4 480
6 610

Group Study Abroad
Students from Africa
		
Students from other Continents

1 130
1 780

Group Study Abroad
(Special Service) =20% of the cost of activity
Other Fees
Supplimentary fee per Subject		
240
Graduation fee			220		
Application Fee
Resident and African students 		
250
Non-Resident Students 		
1030
Late Application Fee
Resident Students
		
520
Non-Resident Students
1030
Student Life Fee
		
130
210

Accommodation Fee
Under Graduate Full Time Student/Annum

7 740

Under Graduate Hostel Fee
during Holidays/Day 			

40

Under Graduate Hostels For Non-Students
During Holidays/Day
		
Graduate Hostels/Annum
Graduate Hostels/Annum
(Including Holidays)
		
Graduate Hostels Fee during Holidays/Day

260
13 080
18 720
120

Graduate Hostels For Non-Students
During Holidays/Day
		

580

Laundry Fee/Annum

830

PhD (Other Faculties)
Resident and African Students 		
10 320
430
Non-Resident Students 		
15 360
640
* Based on normal load of 30 credits for undergraduates ,
24 credits for post graduate students and 8 credit for DABS

14

		

GENERAL
General Academic Regulations
2 00.0 General Provisions
00.1 Preamble
00.11 Senate reserves the right to alter, amend, replace or cancel any of the Academic
Regulations and shall be the final authority for the interpretation of these
regulations.
00.12 Senate has the power to exempt any student from any of the Academic
Regulations.
00.13 In addition to these general academic regulations, special faculty and
departmental regulations, which must be approved by Senate, shall also apply.
00.14 General regulations shall take precedence over special faculty and departmental
regulations unless Senate has otherwise provided
00.15 Faculty regulations shall take precedence over departmental special regulations,
unless Senate has otherwise provided.
00.16 Should a regulation, according to which a programme has been compiled, be
amended, a student who has started a programme under the old regulation and
who has not interrupted studies, may complete such a programme in accordance
with the old regulation on condition that a faculty board may formulate special
transitional requirements in order to enable that student to complete studies in
accordance with the new regulation.
00.17 A student who has been admitted to a programme and fails to register for
such a programme in the ensuing two semesters; or is re-admitted to such a
programme, is deemed to have interrupted studies and forfeits the right to
continue studies under the old regulation.
00.18 Senate shall establish procedures for the approval of all academic programmes
of the University

INFORMATION

as defined in regulation 00.230. A student shall normally register for a major subject
either in the third or fifth semester.
00.220 Minor Subject:
A minor subject shall comprise courses where the workload shall have fewer credits
than those of the major subject as stated in regulation 00.232.
00.230 Types of Programmes:
Possible programme formats shall include single major, combined degree (major/minor,
major/major, multidisciplinary).
00.231 Single Major:
A single major is a programme of study composed of core and optional courses from
one subject (normally chosen either in the third or fifth semester), as well as electives
and general education courses.
00.232 Combined Degree (major/minor):
A combined degree (major/minor) is a programme of study composed of core
and optional courses from two subjects normally in the ratio of major to minor of
approximately 70:30, as well as electives and general education courses. A student’s
major and minor cannot be from the same subject.
00.233 Combined Degree (major/major):
A combined degree (major/major) is a programme of study composed of core and
optional courses from two equally weighted major subjects which are independently
studied, as well as electives and general education courses.

00.211 Academic Year and Semester:
The academic year shall comprise two semesters, each consisting of 14 teaching weeks,
a one week mid-semester break, and two weeks for examinations.

00.234 Combined Degree (multidisciplinary):
A combined degree (multidisciplinary) is a programme of study composed of core and
optional courses from more than two subjects (for example a combination of three
equally weighted subjects, or a series of individualised courses resulting in a programme
constructed by negotiation between a student and a personal tutor, and approved by
Heads of relevant Departments and Deans), as well as electives and general education
courses.

00.212 Programme:
A plan of study made up of core, optional, electives, and general education courses,
lasting over a specified period, which leads to a Degree, or Diploma qualification.

00.240 Types of Courses:
Types of courses shall include core, optional, elective, general education, pre-requisite,
co-requisite, winter, project, service and audit.

00.213 Subject:
A collection of core and optional courses in a given discipline of study that will
constitute a major or minor component of the programme.

00.241 Core Courses:
Core courses are those courses which must be taken in order to meet the requirements
of an award, that is, they are compulsory or mandatory.

00.214 Course:
For the purpose of teaching, each subject shall be divided into one or more components
called courses. A course is a basic building block of teaching and learning activities with
content designed to meet particular aims and objectives. Each course will normally
be assessed within the semester in which it is offered, except for a year-long course,
teaching practice, internship, industrial training or any other attachments.

00.242 Optional Courses:
Optional courses are those courses which may be selected from an approved list of
courses within a subject of study and which count towards the requirements of an
award.

00.2 Definitions of Key Terms
In these regulations, the following terms shall be used as indicated.

00.215 Course Code:
A course code is an identification of a course with a prefix of three capital letters
followed by three digits. The first of the three letters shall normally be the same as the
first letter of the subject, and the digits shall indicate the level, with 100 to 599 for
Bachelor’s Degrees, and Diploma programmes.
00.216 Lecture Hour:
A lecture hour is a period of instruction of a duration of 50 minutes.
00.217 Lecture Hour Equivalent:
One lecture hour equivalent shall be equivalent to any of the following modes of
teaching and learning: One lecture hour; Two to three hours of practical/laboratory
work/activity defined by the department; or any number between one to four weeks
of teaching practice, field work, industrial training or any other attachments or other
academic work outside the classroom.
00.218 Credit or Credit Value:
The number of credits (or credit value) is assigned to a course in relation to the work
done. In any course, work entailing one lecture hour or one lecture hour equivalent per
week throughout a semester shall have a credit value of 1.
00.219 Major Subject:
A major subject shall comprise courses where the subject is treated in depth during the
entire programme of study; and the workload shall depend on the type of programme

00.243 Elective Courses:
Elective courses are those courses which may be selected from a list of courses outside
a subject of study and which count towards the requirements of an award.
00.244 General Education Courses:
General education courses are those courses taken for the purpose of broadening
the knowledge of a student and count towards the overall credit requirement for the
award, but are not part of the core courses of the programme.
00.245 Pre-requisite:
A pre-requisite is a course that must be taken and passed in preparation for another
course.
00.246 Co-requisite:
A co-requisite is a course that must be taken concurrently with other courses to
enhance learning in the programme.
00.247 Winter Course:
A winter course is that which is taken during the long vacation, such as, teaching
practice, industrial training, field work, internships, and attachments. The curriculum
and methods of assessment for these courses will be specified in special faculty and
departmental regulations.
00.248 Project Course:
A project course may be taken in a major subject and the requirements of such a course
and its method of assessment will be specified in special departmental and faculty
regulations. A project course may be taken as a semester course or as a year long project
course.

15

GENERAL

INFORMATION

00.249 Service Course:
A service course is a course taken in a major or minor subject of one department but is
taught by another department.
00.250 Audit Course:
An audit course is a course taken by a student, but no credit is earned in such a course.
00.251 Attempted Credits:
Attempted credits are the total number of credits a student is officially registered for
in a given semester or in all years/levels of study. They exclude audit courses, non credit courses a student may take, and courses which a student has officially dropped.
Attempted credits are used in the calculation of the grade point average (GPA).
00.252 Earned Credits:
Earned credits are the total number of credit values of the courses a student has
passed in a given semester or in all years/levels of study. Earned credits are used in
the determination of a student’s year/level of study and minimum number of credits
required for graduation. Audit and non - credit courses do not count in credits earned
within a particular programme.
00.253 Proceed (Good Academic Standing)
A student is in good academic standing if he/she passed at least half the attempted
semester credits.

00.32 Responsibilities of Students
00.321 While the University strives to give students proper academic advice, it is the
responsibility of the individual student to know and follow all the regulations
of the university.
00.322 A student registered for a course is expected to fulfil all requirements 		
prescribed for that course.
00.323 A student who is unable to attend classes due to illness should notify the
Director of Academic Service of this fact within twenty one consecutive days
from the day the student misses classes. Certification from a recognised health
officer will be required in support. Prior permission or supporting evidence will
be necessary for circumstances other than ill health.
00.324 A student who enters or returns to the university late shall not be entitled to
extra tuition.
00.325 A student may have access to their academic transcript and has the right of
appeal on any matters concerning it, to Senate through their Faculty Board.
00.4 Exemptions, Credit Banking, Credit Transfer, and recognition of prior learning.
00.41 Permission for exemptions shall be sought in all cases from the Director, 		
Academic Services, and exemption shall be subject to the approval of the
relevant Head(s) of Department. Exemption from taking certain courses may be
granted under the following conditions:
a) A student who has been registered at UB can bank credits up to a maximum
of ten consecutive semesters. Exemption may be given to a former UB
student who subsequently rejoins UB if such a student has banked credits.
Once such exemption has been granted, the programme for which the 		
student is currently registered will be credited with the original marks
obtained for the credit course(s) and the corresponding grade points.
b) Exemption(s) may be given to a student if such a student took a course
or courses at another recognised university or institution with which UB
has a formal articulation agreement, within ten semesters prior to
registration. Once such exemptions have been granted, the student may 		
transfer up to a maximum of one-half of the total credits required 		
for the programme. However, grade points for such students are not 		
transferable, and the cumulative GPA shall be computed on the basis of the
work done at UB only.
c) Exemption may be granted to a student if such a student took a course or
courses at another recognized University or institution with which UB has no
formal articulation agreement within ten semesters prior to registration.
Such exemptions shall be based on course to course articulation
and once they have been granted a student may transfer up to a
maximum of one third of the total credits required for the programme.
However grade points for such students are not transferable, and the 		
cumulative GPA shall be computed on the basis of work done at UB only.
(d) Exemption(s) may be given to a student for relevant work experience 		
and recognised prior learning upon satisfactory performance in 		
assessments of their knowledge, skills and experience in the area
as outlined in Section 6.0 of the policy organised by the Department. A 		
student who has performed such tests shall be awarded an appropriate
grade, and may be exempted in the relevant courses up to a
maximum of one-sixth of the total credits required for the programme.

00.254 Proceed (Academic Risk)
A student who fails more than 50% of the attempted credits but passes at least one
core/optional/core GEC course in the semester shall be placed on Academic Risk status.
A student on Academic Risk shall proceed to the next semester but shall register for
credits not exceeding sixteen (16).
00.255 Proceed (Academic Restriction)
A student on Academic Risk who fails more than 50% of the attempted semester
credits but passes at least one core/optional/core-GEC course in the semester shall be
placed on Academic Restriction status. A student on Academic Restriction may not
enroll for more than fourteen (14) semester credits.
00.256 Enrolment Terminated
A student who fails more than 50% of the attempted semester credits and also fails
all core, optional and core GEC courses, as well as a student on Academic Restriction
who fails more than 50% of the attempted semester credits regardless of performance
in core/optional/core GEC courses shall be placed on Enrolment Terminated status. A
student on Enrolment Terminated status may only be readmitted to the University after
a lapse of at least one (1) semester.
0.3 Students
00.31 Registered Students
00.311 Full-time Student: A full-time undergraduate student is one who is registered
with the University and carries a minimum workload of 15 credits per semester, unless
officially exempted.
00.312 Part-time Student:
A part-time undergraduate student is one who is registered with the University and
normally carries a workload of less than 15 credits per semester.
00.313 Transfer Student:
A transfer student is one who is registered with UB after transferring academic credits
deemed to be equivalent to UB credits. Such credits may come from another recognised
university or equivalent, or be the result of various articulation agreements between UB
and other institutions. Such a student can only transfer up to a maximum of one-half
of the total credits required for the programme, and must complete the remaining
one-half in the university. The total credits transferred are subject to acceptance by the
relevant Department(s). Grade points are not transferable, and the cumulative GPA of
transfer students will be computed on the basis of the work done at UB only.
00.314 Visiting/Exchange/Audit Student:
A visiting/exchange/audit student is one who satisfies the University entrance
requirements and is registered for a selected number of courses for credit or audit. Such
students may be from within the country, from abroad or under exchange programmes.
00.315 Special Student:
A special student is one who satisfies the University entrance requirements, but does not
have immediate plans to enter a programme and wants to take courses with approval
from the department. Such a student shall be limited to register for a maximum of
fifteen credits overall.

00.42 Articulation agreements between UB and other institutions resulting in de facto
exemptions shall be applied to general admissions to diploma, higher diploma
and degree programmes as well as to satisfy programme specific internal
requirements.
00.5 Entrance Qualifications
00.51 Normal Entry Scheme
00.511 The normal requirement for entrance to Diploma Programmes are specified in
General Regulation 10.2.
00.512 The normal requirements for entrance to Bachelor’s Degree Programmes are
specified in General Regulation 20.2.
00.52 Mature Age Entry Scheme for Undergraduate Programmes
00.521 Applicants of at least 25 years of age on the first day of the semester of entry
who have BGCSE with grade C or better in at least three subjects and grade
D or better in English Language or equivalent but lack the qualifications for
entry into the undergraduate programmes may apply as a mature age applicant.
00.522 Subject to regulation 00.521, any additional entry requirements shall be
specified in the appropriate special faculty and departmental regulations.
00.523 Subject to regulations 00.521 and 00.522, a mature age applicant may use the
direct entry route if such an applicant possesses BGCSE or equivalent with
grade B or better in two subjects and grade C or better in four subjects.

16

GENERAL
00.53 Transfer Students
00.531 Transfer students from other recognised universities or institutions may be
accepted for undergraduate studies if they have at least a cumulative GPA
of 2.00 (on a five point scale) or equivalent and are eligible to return to the
university or institution last attended.
00.532 Transfer students with a cumulative GPA of less than 2.00 (on a five
point scale) or equivalent shall be subjected to the provisions of general 		
academic regulation 00.9 to determine their admissibility for undergraduate
studies.
00.6 Registration
00.611 The normal workload for a full-time undergraduate student shall be 15 to18
credits per semester.
00.612 A full-time undergraduate student may carry 12 to 14 credits per semester if
such a student has approved course exemptions or is on academic restriction.
00.613 Subject to the provisions of regulation 00.912, a full-time undergraduate
student may carry 19 to a maximum of 21 credits if such a student has a
GPA of at least 3.50.
00.614 No student shall be registered for any programme one week after the
commencement of classes. Any exception to this regulation must have the
written permission of the Dean of the Faculty who may consult with the Head
of Department and shall not extend beyond the end of the second week after
the commencement of classes.
00.615 A student may register for a course only if the official class timetable allows
the student to attend all the classes.
00.616 No student shall be allowed to add a course or courses after the first week of
the commencement of classes.
00.617 A student may drop a course or courses up to the end of the second week of
the commencement of classes.
00.618 A student who has been admitted to the university can register for a core,
optional, elective or general education course offered in any of the university
programmes, subject to pre-requisites or any other approved programme
restrictions.
00.619 An undergraduate student must, during the first two semesters at the
University of Botswana, register for at least ten credits in level 100 general
education courses in areas 1 and 2, except where exemptions have been
provided.
00.620 In addition to the requirement of General Academic Regulation 00.619, an
undergraduate student must register for a minimum of an additional nine
credits of elective and/or general education courses.
00.621 The total number of credits earned by a student from elective and general
education courses shall not exceed one third of the total credits gained in the
entire programme.
00.622 A Dean, on the recommendation of a relevant department may cancel the
registration of a student or the registration for a course during a semester,
if the student does not meet the programme requirements or prerequisite
requirements for the course.
00.623 A registered student shall have access to an official registration record printout
detailing the course(s) registered for. It is the student’s responsibility to ensure
that the registration record is correct. Any registration record amendments
should be made by the end of the add/drop/late registration period.
00.624 A student should not attend a course unless such a course is officially
registered for as indicated on the official registration printout.
00.625 A student cannot earn credit for a course unless such a course is officially
registered for as indicated on the official registration printout.
00.626 Any student registered for a course which is abandoned or not attended will
be recorded with a zero mark for any graded component not taken.
00.627 The minimum number of students required in order for an optional course
to run is 15 students for levels 100 to 200 classes, and 8 students for classes
above level 200 except as permitted by Senate.
00.628 The maximum number of students permitted to be enrolled in each course
shall be determined by the Head of Department in consultation with the Dean.
00.629 Cancellation of Classes: If no class cancellation notice is posted on the
classroom door, classes are officially considered cancelled if an instructor is 15
minutes late. All cases of cancelled classes must be reported to the relevant Head
of department.
00.630 A visiting/exchange/special/audit student may register to take courses for
credit or audit. An application to take courses for credit or audit should be
made to the Director of Academic Services. The application will be subject to
approval by the relevant Head(s) of Department(s).
00.631 A student may, in addition to their normal academic programme, register to
audit courses up to a maximum of three credits.
00.632 A student on audit courses shall not be subject to assessment, but such
audited course(s) shall be recorded on the student’s academic transcript.
00.633 A visiting/exchange/special student who register for credit course(s) and

INFORMATION

subsequently enrols in an academic programme of UB shall have their courses
treated in accordance with general academic regulation 00.41 (b) on credit
banking.

00.7 Withdrawal
00.711 Withdrawing refers to withdrawing from all courses for which a student is
enrolled for a given semester, and therefore the student is no longer enrolled.
The withdrawal application should be lodged through the relevant Head of
Department and Dean’s office.
00.712 A student may officially withdraw from the University by voluntarily
terminating enrolment during a semester which is in progress. Such a student
shall not receive any credit for courses taken during the semester. If such a
student subsequently enrols in the University the courses previously taken
shall be treated in accordance with regulation 00.41 (b) on credit banking.
00.713 A student who withdraws prior to the end of the eighth week of a 		
semester or who withdraws after the eighth week of a semester where
there are documented acceptable extenuating circumstances, will receive a
grade of “W” (withdrawn) otherwise a zero mark will be recorded for any
graded component not taken.
00.714 If a student is obliged through illness or any other cause to be absent
from classes for a continuous period exceeding three weeks, the Dean, in
consultation with relevant Departments and in light of an appropriate
medical report, shall decide whether such a student shall be withdrawn from
the University for the duration of that semester.
00.715 A student who has withdrawn from the university may re-enter the
programme subject to quota restrictions and compliance with existing
programme requirements. The University does not guarantee to offer the same
courses as at the time the student withdrew from the University.
00.8 Assessment
00.81 Continuous Assessment
00.811 The continuous assessment component of each course may include one or
more of the following: written assignments, written tests, practicals, projects,
research exercises, essays, open book tests, independent study, dissertations/
theses, oral tests, plus other forms of continuous assessment as shall be
determined by the instructor and approved by the Head of Department.
00.812 A student is required to fulfil all requirements prescribed for continuous
assessment. Failure to do so without valid reasons will normally incur
penalties as prescribed in special faculty and departmental regulations.
00.813 Progress Reports: Each faculty shall report continuous assessment marks
for all undergraduate students by the end of the eighth week of classes.
Progress reports are made available to students and to the students’ 		
advisors through the computer system at UB.
00.82 Final Examinations
Where the assessment of a course includes final examinations, the following regulations
shall apply:
00.821 All final examinations shall be held during the scheduled examination period
at the end of the semester in which the course is taught.
00.822 A paper in a final written examination of a course shall be of one to three 		
hours duration.
00.823 Other forms of examination of a course shall be as prescribed in special
faculty and departmental regulations.
00.824 A student must take final examinations at the scheduled times. Failure to 		
do so without valid reasons will amount to a candidate being awarded a zero
mark in that particular examination.
00.825 Special final examinations will be considered on an individual basis for 		
students who miss scheduled final examinations due to exceptional and
extenuating circumstances.
00.826 Once a student has sat for an examination, the student may not afterwards
apply for a special examination on the basis of unforeseen circumstances or
illness.
00.827 In the week preceding the final examinations, all lectures and tutorials
will continue, however, no assignment, test, examination, field trip, or any
assessment work may be scheduled.
00.83 Quality Assurance
00.831 Senate shall determine the system of quality assurance of programmes of the
university.
00.84 Overall Course Grade
(Applicable to undergraduates entering from August 2011 deferred from August 2009)

17

GENERAL

INFORMATION

00.841 In any course, the weighting between different components of assessment
shall be specified in the special faculty and departmental regulations.

point for each course;
d) Obtain the total weighted score by adding the weighted scores for all the
courses;
e) The cumulative GPA is given by the total weighted score divided 		
by the total number of earned credits. The cumulative GPA 		
shall be computed to two decimal places.

00.842 Overall performance in a course shall be assessed on a percentage scale, a 		
letter grade, and a grade point as follows:
Marks (%)
90 – 100 		
85 – 89.9 		
80 – 84.9 		
75 – 79.9 		
70 – 74.9 		
65 – 69.9 		
60 – 64.9 		
55 – 59.9 		
50 – 54.9 		
45 – 49.9 		
40 – 44.9 		
35 – 39.9 		
0 – 34.9 		

Letter Grade
A+
A
AB+
B
BC+
C
CD+
D
DE

Grade Point
5.0
4.9
4.7
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

00.862

00.87 Supplementary Examinations
00.871

Supplementary examinations may be permitted to enable a student to
obtain the minimum mark required in a course to satisfy any additional
requirements as specified in the Faculty and Departmental special
regulations
in order to proceed to the following semester or pass the final semester of
study.

00.872

Except as stated in Faculty Special and Departmental regulations a full
time student may be allowed to write supplementary examinations in a
maximum of three failed courses in any one Semester, or the equivalent
number for part time study.

00.873

In determining whether a student shall be permitted to supplement, Senate
shall first of all satisfy itself that supplementation will enable the students
to obtain the minimum mark required to pass a course, before satisfying
any other requirement as specified in Faculty Special and departmental
regulations.

00.874

In order to be permitted to supplement a failed course a student must have
obtained the following final mark in the course:

00.843 When letter grades are used, they shall represent the following:
A+		
A 		
A- 		
B+ 		
B 		
B- 		
C+ 		
C 		
C- 		
D+ 		
D 		
D-		
E 		
I 		
W		
AUD

Outstanding
Excellent
Excellent
Very Good
Very Good
Good
Good
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Poor - Fail
Poor - Fail
Poor - Fail
Very Poor - Fail
Incomplete
Withdrawn
Audit Course. No credit granted

00.844 An Incomplete grade (I) may be awarded when some assigned work comprising
continuous assessment, for example a project, has not been completed
with valid reasons. The I letter grade has no grade point. The I grade must
be converted to an appropriate mark within the following twelve months;
otherwise the incomplete work will be awarded a zero mark.

Undergraduate:
Graduate:		

00.851 A student shall only be awarded a qualification after completing a minimum
number of credits in a given programme as follows:
a) A minimum of 60 credits in a Diploma programme with a duration of 4
semesters; or
b) A minimum of 90 credits in a Higher Diploma programme with a duration
of 6 semesters; or
c) A minimum of 120 credits in Bachelors’ Degree programmes with a 		
duration of 8 semesters; or
d) A minimum of 150 credits in Bachelors’ Degree programmes with a 		
duration of 10 semesters.
00.852 To be awarded a qualification, at least two thirds of the total credits must come
from core and optional courses prescribed in the programme, and the total
number of credits from elective courses shall not exceed one third of the total
credits. Where there have been exemptions, general academic regulation 00.862
shall apply.
00.86 Calculating Cumulative GPA
00.861 Cumulative GPA associated with courses at UB at any time during the
student’s programme is obtained as follows:
a) Identify the earned credits for the course;
b) Identify the marks (%), corresponding letter grade and the grade point
using the table in regulation 0.842;
c) Obtain the weighted score by multiplying the earned credits and the grade

40-49%
50-54%

00.875

If a student is permitted to supplement in order to pass a course, the
maximum course mark awarded shall not exceed the minimum requirement
to pass that course as specified in Faculty Special and Departmental
regulations.

00.876

In recalculating the final course mark, the original continuous assessment
mark shall be used.

00.877

If in a given course, a student obtains a supplementary mark that is lower
than the original mark, then the original mark shall be retained.

00.878

The original mark and the supplementary mark obtained in a course shall be
recorded on the student Academic Transcript.

00.879

A fee to be determined by the University from time to time shall be charged
for each course to be supplemented.

00.880

To sit for supplementary examinations, a student shall be required to
register for all courses they intend to supplement.
Any student who fails to write supplementary examinations after registering
for them shall be awarded a 0 (zero) mark for supplementary examinations.

00.845 Passing a course means obtaining a mark of at least 50 percent.
00.85 Completion of Credits in a Programme

Where there have been exemptions for credits as per regulation 00.4, 		
grade points from other institutions are not transferable to UB, and 		
the cumulative GPA shall be computed on the basis of the work
done at UB only.

00.881

00.9 Progression from Semester to Semester
00.91 Proceed
00.911
To remain in academic good standing, a student must pass at least 50% of
the attempted semester credits.
00.912

A student proceeding on academic good standing who fails a core,
prerequisite or co-requisite course must retake the course. Such a student
shall carry a semester credit load not exceeding eighteen (18) credits.

00.92 Proceed (Academic Risk)
00.921
A student who fails more than 50% of the attempted semester credits 		
but passes at least one attempted core/optional/core GEC course, shall be
placed on Academic Risk status.
00.922

18

A student on Academic Risk status must retake any failed core, prerequisite
and co-requisite course/s when next offered. Such a student shall carry a

GENERAL
semester credit load not exceeding sixteen (16) credits.
00.923
00.924

00.925

A student on Academic Risk status must pass at least 50% of the attempted
semester credits to proceed on Academic Good Standing status.
A student on Academic Risk status may apply to change to another
programme for which the student qualifies and can enter in the 		
subsequent semester(s), provided the new programme does not 		
have the same core courses that the student failed in the 			
current programme.
A student on Academic Risk status who applies to change to another 		
programme and is successful, shall not have their academic standing in
the previous programme used in determining progression 			
decisions in the new programme.

INFORMATION

in satisfying the minimum number of credits required for 			
graduation the credits shall count only once where a passing 		
grade is recorded.
00.96 Prerequisite Courses
00.961
A student must achieve at least fifty (50 C-) in a prerequisite to enrol in
the specific course(s) for which the course is a prerequisite.
00.97 Academic Standing
00.971
At the end of each semester, a student’s academic standing shall be 		
reported using the following symbols:
P
AR
ARR
ET
W

00.93 Proceed (Academic Restriction)
00.931
A student on Academic Risk who fails more than 50% of the attempted
semester credits but passes at least one core/optional/core GEC course 		
shall be placed on Academic Restriction status.

Proceed (Academic Good Standing)
Proceed (Academic Risk)
Proceed (Academic Restriction)
Enrolment Terminated
Withdrawn with Permission

00.972 Summary Guide to Academic Standing
00.932

00.933
00.934
00.935		

00.936

A student on Academic Restriction status must retake any failed core, prerequisite and co-requisite course(s) when next offered. Such a student
shall carry a semester credit load not exceeding fourteen (14) credits.
A student on Academic Restriction status shall be required to undertake
remedial action as advised by the Department
A student on Academic Restriction status must pass at least 50% of the
attempted semester credits to proceed on Academic Good Standing status.

Pass ≥ 50%
attempted credits

Pass < 50% of
attempted credits
but passed at least
one core/optional/
core GEC course.

Pass < 50% of
attempted credits
and fail all core,
optional and core
GEC courses.

Proceed (Good
Academic Standing)

Proceed (Good
Academic Standing)

Proceed (Academic
Risk)

Enrolment
Terminated

Proceed (Academic
Risk)

Proceed (Good
Academic Standing)

Proceed (Academic
Ristriction)

Enrolment
Terminated

A student on Academic Restriction status who applies to change to		
another programme and is successful, shall not have their academic		
academic standing in the previous programme used in determining 		
progression decisions in the new programme.

Proceed (Academic
Restriction)

Proceed (Good
Academic Standing)

Enrolment
Terminated

Enrolment
Terminated

00.942

A student on Academic Risk who fails more than 50% of the attempted
semester credits and also fails all attempted core, optional and core GEC
courses shall be put on Enrolment Terminated status.

00.943

A student on Academic Restriction who fails more than 50% of the 		
attempted semester credits regardless of performance in core/optional/
core GEC courses shall be placed on Enrolment Terminated status.

00.945

Performance in Current Learning Period (Semester)

A student on Academic Restriction status may apply to change to 		
another programme for which the student qualifies and can enter in the
subsequent semester(s), provided the new programme does not have 		
the same core courses that the student failed in the current programme.

00.94 Enrolment Terminated
00.941
A student who fails more than 50% of the attempted semester credits 		
and also fail all attempted core, optional and core GEC courses shall be
put on Enrolment Terminated.

00.944

Academic
Standing in
Previous Semester

A student on Enrolment Terminated may apply for readmission to the 		
same programme after a lapse of at least one (1) semester. To return to
the programme the student must apply and be accepted for re-entry/		
readmission.
A student on Enrolment Terminated may apply to change to another 		
programme for which the student qualifies after a lapse of at 		
least one (1) semester, provided the new programme does not have 		
the same core courses that the student failed in the current programme.

00.95 Retaking Courses
00.951
A student shall not retake a course already passed with a minimum grade
of fifty (50 C-).
0.952 		

A student who has failed a core, prerequisite, co-requisite course or a core
general education course must retake the course.

00.953

A student who has failed an optional, elective, a non-core general 		
education course may retake the course or take a substitute course.

00.954

When a student retakes a course, the series of retakes with their grades
shall appear on the student’s official academic record. However, 		

00.98 Minimum Cumulative GPA Required for Graduation
00.981 A student should attain a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.00 to be considered
for graduation. The cumulative GPA shall be calculated based on the earned
credits.
01.0 Aegrotat Regulations
01.01 If a student in the final semester of a programme is prevented by illness, or
other sufficient cause, from undertaking some of the requirements for
assessment (continuous assessment or final examinations), Senate may, upon
written report of the Department(s) concerned, and upon any other evidence
as it shall deem fit, recommend to assign an aegrotat award.
The student’s illness or incapacity must be reported to the office of the Director of
Academic Services within two weeks of the date on which the test(s) or examination(s)
should have been written.
01.02 The aegrotat award shall be unclassified.
10. General Regulations for Undergraduate Diploma and Higher Diploma Programmes
10.1 Diploma Programmes
10.11 Diplomas
Programme titles appear in Faculty and Departmental sections below.
10.12 Higher Diplomas
Programme titles appear in Faculty and Departmental sections below.
10.2 Entrance Qualifications
10.21 The normal entry requirement for Diploma programmes is at least six subjects
not below grade D in the BGCSE or equivalent. English language shall be one
of the required subjects. Five subjects may be accepted. A grade of C shall be
required in at least three of the five or six subjects.
10.22 Other entry qualifications for entry to Diploma programmes may be accepted
on their own merit as alternatives. In particular, attention is drawn to the
regulations governing Mature Age Applicants in 00.52 and the regulation in
respect to Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) General Academic Regulation

19

GENERAL

INFORMATION

00.41.

semesters full-time or up to 16 to 20 semesters part-time respectively.

10.23 Subject to Regulation 10.21, any additional requirements shall be specified in
appropriate special regulations.

20.322 A student may register for a combined degree programme (major/major, major/
minor or multidisciplinary) or single major programme as shall be specified in
special departmental and faculty regulations.

10.24 The entry requirements specified in 10.21, 10.22 and 10.23 do not guarantee
admission.

20.4 Degree Classification

10.3 Programme Structure
10.31 Curriculum and Assessment
The curriculum and methods of assessment for the undergraduate Diploma
programmes shall be specified in special faculty and departmental regulations.

20.41 In all Faculties , the Bachelor’s Degree shall be classified as follows (with the
cumulative GPA computed to one decimal place) and based on the minimum
number of credits as specified in regulation 00.851.

10.32 Duration of the Programme
10.321 Diploma and Higher Diploma Programmes
The normal duration for Diploma or Higher Diploma programmes shall be as
follows: 4 to 6 semesters on a full-time basis; 8 to 12 semesters on a part-time
basis.

Classification 			
First Class: 				
Second Class, Upper Division: 		
Second Class, Lower Division: 		
Pass: 				

10.4 Classification of Results

General Education Courses
The aim of General Education is to provide the University of Botswana graduates with
broad-based knowledge and skills that prepare them for life, the world of work and
citizenship in the context of the University’s Vision, Mission and Values. The graduates
are expected to have certain general attributes, alongside the knowledge and skills of
their specialist discipline. In accordance with the Learning and Teaching Policy, these
graduate attributes are as follows:

10.41 Subject to regulations 00.85 and 00.98, the overall result of the Diploma or
Higher Diploma shall be classified based on the cumulative GPA (computed to
one decimal place) that includes all earned credits as follows:
Classification 		
Distinction:		
Merit:		
Credit:		
Pass:			

Cumulative GPA
4.4 – 5.0
3.6 – 4.3
2.8 – 3.5
2.0 – 2.7

- Information and communication technology knowledge and skills
- Self-directed, life-long learning skills
- Critical and creative thinking skills
- Problem-solving skills
- Communication skills
- Entrepreneurship and employability skills
- Organization and teamwork skills
- Research skills and information literacy
- Social responsibility and leadership skills
- Interpersonal skills
- Cross-cultural fluency
- Accountability and ethical standards

20. General Regulations for Bachelor’s Degree
Programmes
20.1 Degree Programmes
Programme titles appear in Faculty and Departmental sections below.
20.2 Entrance Qualifications
20.21 The normal entry requirement for Degree programmes shall be at least six subjects
not below grade D in the BGCSE or its equivalent. The grades obtained in five
of the subjects shall be grade C or better from one examination sitting. Grades
obtained from two (not more) examination sittings are acceptable, provided the
applicant has grade B or better in two subjects and grade C or better in four
subjects. English language must be grade C or better for non-Science based
programmes and grade D or better in Science-based programmes.
20.22 Other entry qualifications may be accepted on their own merit as alternatives.
In particular, attention is drawn to the regulations governing mature age
applicants in 00.52 and the regulation in respect to recognition of prior learning
general academic regulation 00.41.
20.23 Applicants possessing an acceptable Certificate qualification with grade C or
better in at least 4 subjects and grade D in English language in the BGCSE
or equivalent may be considered for entry to Level 100 of a related bachelors
programme.

Graduate attributes are infused in core, optional, elective and General Education courses;
and through pedagogy, engagement, and policy implementation. Communication skills
are offered in Area 1; and Information and Communication Technology knowledge and
skills are offered in Area 2.
Area 1 Communication and Academic Literacy Skills
Courses in Communication and Academic Literacy are open to Certificate, Diploma and
Degree students. The level 100 courses with the prefix COM are compulsory:
COM101
COM102
COM111
COM112
COM121

20.24 Where entry is on the basis of a Diploma qualification, the Diploma shall
normally be two years or more and one acceptable to UB. Entry on the basis of
a Diploma of less than two years in duration may be considered if the applicant
has a previous related Certificate qualification.

COM122
COM131

20.25 Subject to Regulation 20.21, any additional requirements shall be specified in
appropriate special faculty and departmental regulations.

COM141

20.26 The entry requirements specified in 20.21, 20.22, 20.23, 20.24 and 20.25 do not
guarantee admission.
20.3 Programme Structure
20.31 Curriculum and Assessment
The curriculum and methods of assessment for Bachelor’s degree 		
programmes shall be specified in special faculty and departmental 		
regulations.
20.32 Duration of the Programme
20.321 The normal duration for Bachelor’s programmes shall be as follows: 8 to 10

Cumulative GPA
4.4 – 5.0
3.6 – 4.3
2.8 – 3.5
2.0 – 2.7

COM132

COM142
COM151
COM152
COM161
COM162

Communication and Academic Literacy Skills (Medicine 			
and Health Sciences); 3 credits.
Health Communication (Medicine and Health Sciences); 3credits.
Communication and Academic Literacy Skills 				
(Humanities and Education); 3 credits.
Academic and Professional 					
Communication (Humanities and Education); 3 credits.
Communication and Academic 					
Literacy Skills (Business); 3 credits.
Academic and Professional Communication (Business); 3 credits.
Communication and Academic Literacy Skills 				
(Engineering and Technology); 3 credits.
Academic and Professional Communication (Engineering and 		
Technology); 3 credits.
Communication and Academic Literacy Skills (Science); 			
3 credits.
Academic and Professional Communication (Science); 3 credits.
Communication and Academic Literacy Skills (Social 			
Science); 3 credits.
Academic and Professional Communication (Social Science); 3 credits.
Communication and Academic Literacy Skills (Education); 3 credits
Academic and Professional Communication (Education); 3 credits

Area 2 Information and Communication Technology knowledge and Skills
Courses in the Information and Communication Technology knowledge and Skills are
open to Certificate, Diploma and Degree students. The level 100 courses with the prefix
ICT are compulsory:

20

GENERAL
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals
1; 2 credits
ICT122:
Computer Skills Fundamentals
2; 2 credits
General Education courses available to all students
(Students should consult relevant departments on availability of the GEC’s)
GEC210 Introduction to Legal Language
(2, CSSU)
GEC211
Advanced Writing Skills (2, CSSU)
GEC212 Advanced Oral Presentations (2, CSSU)
GEC213 Advanced Communication Skills (2, CSSU)
GEC232 Critical Thinking - A Life Tool 2, Theology and Religious Studies)
GEC233 Logic I: Introduction to Logic
(2, Theology and Religious Studies)
GEC330 Introduction to Research Methods
(3, All Faculties)
GEC333 Logic II: Logic and the Sciences (2, Theology and Religious Studies)
GEC334 Epistemology: Theories of Truth
(2, Theology and Religious Studies)
GEC441 Introduction to Wetland Research
GEC141
GEC145
GEC148
GEC247
GEC248
GEC249
GEC371
GEC441
GEC250
GEC251
GEC252
GEC253
GEC254
GEC350
GEC255
GEC256
GEC257
GEC258
GEC355
GEC356
GEC357
GEC261
GEC262
GEC263
GEC264
GEC268
GEC362
GEC270
GEC271
GEC272
GEC371
GEC275
GEC276
GEC277
GEC278
GEC279
GEC273
GEC372
GEC441
SWG101

Fitness through Physical Education (2, Physical Education)
Introduction to Swimming (2, Physical Education)
Health and Wellness (2, Physical Education)
HIV/AIDS Education, Prevention and 				
Control (3, Nursing Education)
Human Nutrition (3, Biological Sciences)
Human Sexuality (3, Biological Sciences)
Personal Development and
Special Education
(3, Biological Sciences)
Earth Processes, Mineral Resources and Development (2, Geology)
Ground Water and Society (2, Geology)
Origins of the Universe (2, Physics)
Energy and Society (2, Physics)
The Environment: Our Home, Our Resource
(2,Environmental Science)
Environmental Change in Southern Africa
(2,Environmental Science)
Electrical Energy and RuralDevelopment (2, Electrical Engineering)
History of Technology (2 Mechanical Engineering)
Ancient and Modern Structures
(2, Civil Engineering)
Art and Science of Design (2, Technology and Educational Studies)
Telecommunications in Society
(2, Electrical Engineering)
Renewable Energy (2 credits Mechanical Engineering)
Advances in Technology (2 Technology and Educational Studies)
The Languages of Botswana (2, African Languages and Literature)
Introduction to Cultural Studies (2, African Languages and Literature)
The Politics of Gender (2, Theology and Religious Studies)
Religion and Development (2, Theology and Religious Studies)
Literature of Liberation (2, English)
Africa and Its Past on Film (2, History)
Accounting for Non- Business Majors (3, Accounting and Finance)
Basic Cost Accounting and Control (3, Accounting and Finance)
Basic Finance and Taxation
(3, Accounting and Finance)
Small Business Entrepreneurship (3, Management)
Basic Concepts in Marketing
(3, Management)
Contemporary Economic Issues
(3, Economics)
Law and Society in Botswana
(3, Law)
Population and Society (3, Population Studies)
e-Governance (2, Political and Administrative Studies)
The State and Society (2, Political and Administrative Studies)
Migration and Globalisation (2, Population Studies)
Special Education (2)
First Year Experience (3, Social Work)

Regulations for the Award of Fellowships,
Scholarships, Studentship, Exhibitions and Prizes
0.10 General
90.11 The following Regulations are approved as per Statute 42d. 9
90.12 Special Regulations shall be approved to govern each fellowship,
scholarship,studentship, exhibition or other prize established as a result of a
donation, bequestor a financial convenant accepted by the University Council.
90.13 Special Regulations shall only be amended with the written agreement of the
donor or executor (unless the donor has since died or after due search cannot
be traced).
90.14 No award of a fellowship, scholarship, studentship, exhibition or other prize shall
be made in any year in which the accumulated special funds for that award are
less than the annual value of the award.

INFORMATION

90.20 Fellowships
90.21 Procedures for Instituting Fellowships
i) All proposals for the institution of fellowships shall be forwarded to the Fellowships
Committee.
ii) Proposals shall include the suggested name of the fellowship, full reasons for making
the proposals and choosing the particular person, and the conditions under which
the fellowship may be awarded, including the composition of the Fellowship
Selection Committee.
iii) If the proposed fellowship is to be named in honour of a particular person or
organisation, the donor should not inform the person(s) or organisation he/she
wishes to honour before the Fellowships Committee has considered the proposal.
iv) Prospective donors of fellowships should state the intended time span of the
fellowship, the amount of money they wish to donate to the University, and the
value of each fellowship.
v) As a general principle, current members of staff may not have fellowships named
after them.
vi) When the Fellowships Committee has satisfied itself as to the suitability of the
proposed fellowship and its administration, it shall make a recommendation to the
Senate.
vii) Before making a recommendation to the Senate, the Fellowships Committee may
request the prospective donor to supply more detailed information on the financing,
nature of conditions for the fellowship, and may advise the donor of the need to
increase the donation value of the award.
viii) On the recommendation of the Fellowships Committee, the Senate shall review and
set the minimum amount which a donor shall be required to pay to the University
in order to establish a fellowship.
ix) A fellowship shall be established or terminated by the University Council on the
recommendation of the Senate.
90.22 Procedures for the Award of a Fellowship
i) All proposals for the award of a fellowship to any student shall first be made to the
Fellowship Selection Committee, which after careful deliberation shall recommend
the name(s) of the recipient(s) to the Fellowships Committee.
ii) If the recommendation for an award of a fellowship is received and approved by the
Fellowships Committee, the Vice Chancellor may approve the award on behalf of
the Senate.
iii) No award of a fellowship may be approved before the donor has paid to the
University the minimum amount required to establish a fellowship.
iv) All awards of fellowships shall be made subject to the Special Regulations for the
individual fellowships.
90.23 Special Regulations for the University of Botswana Alumni Fellowship
The Alumni Fellowship was established in 1996/97 as a result of a donation by the
Alumni of the University of Botswana Development Trust (ALUBDEV) to promote
Master’s Degree studies and research on some aspect of Botswana culture in any field
of study. The Alumni Fellowship will cover the following fees: tuition, book and caution
fee, Identity Card and fieldwork for both part and full-time students. For full-time
Students, residence, refectory and laundry fees will also be covered by the fellowship.
i) The Alumni Fellowship shall be tenable at the University of Botswana and may be
awarded by the Senate to citizens of Botswana who qualify for Master’s Degree
studies in any field.
ii) The maximum period of the fellowship shall be two years for full-time study and
three years for part-time study.
iii) The Senate shall satisfy itself that the focus of the intended Master’s Degree studies
by the proposed recipient is on some aspect of Botswana culture.
iv) The recipient of the Fellowship shall be required to maintain a satisfactory
performance during the course of study.
v) The UB Alumni Fellowship Selection Committee shall include two representatives of
the Alumni of the University of Botswana Development Trust (ALUBDEV).
90.30 Scholarships
90.40 Studentship
90.50 Exhibitions
90.60 Prizes
90.61 Procedures for Instituting Prizes
i) All proposals for the institution of prizes shall be forwarded to the Director, Academic
Services.
ii) Proposals shall include the suggested name of the prize, full reasons for making the
proposals and choosing the particular name, and the conditions under which the
prize may be awarded.
iii) If the proposed prize is to be named in honour of a particular person or group,
the donor should not inform the person(s) he/she wishes to honour before the
appropriate University authorities have considered the proposal.
iv) Prospective donors of prizes should state the intended time span of the prize, the

21

GENERAL

INFORMATION

amount of money they wish to donate, and the value of each award of the prize.
They may also indicate the nature of the prize.
v) As a general principle, current members of staff may not have prizes named after
them.
vi) When the Department or Faculty has satisfied itself as to the suitability of the prize,
it shall make a recommendation to the Senate.
vii) Before making a recommendation to the Senate, the Department or Faculty may
request the prospective donor to supply more detailed information on the financing,
nature of conditions for the award of the prize, and may advise the donor of the
need to increase the donation value of the award.
90.62 Procedures for the Award of Prizes
i) A prospective donor may suggest a person who qualifies to receive an award for
consideration by the Department or Faculty.
ii) Any proposal for the institution of a prize may include the composition of the
awarding committee.
iii) All proposals for the award of a prize to any student shall first be made to the
awarding committee, which after careful deliberation shall recommend the name(s)
of the recipient(s).
iv) Subject to the Special Regulations for individual prizes, the award may be in cash
or in books to the value of the prize, and the award may be made jointly to two
or more persons in any one year in which case its value shall be shared equally
between them.
90.63 The following Special Regulations apply to individual prizes:
1. Roderick Ross Prize in Administration
This prize was established in 1982/83 as a result of an annual donation to the University
by Roderick Ross, a former visiting Registrar (1978) to the then University College of
Botswana, to mark its attainment of full University status and to encourage studies in
Administration. The prize may be awarded annually by the Senate to the student with
the best marks in the final examinations in the subject Public Administration for the BA
Degree. The Senate may in any year award the prize jointly or, exceptionally and on the
recommendation of the Board of the Faculty of Social Sciences, make no award where
an insufficiently high standard has been achieved. The prize shall be in books, chosen by
the winner, to the value of 15 Pounds in Pula.
2. Isaac Schapera Prize
This prize was established in 1983/84 as a result of a donation to the University of
the royalties accruing from the sale of the book “Land Reform In The Making”, edited
by R.P. Werbner. The prize, which is in honour of Professor Isaac Schapera’s major
contribution to the Social Sciences in Botswana, may be awarded, as income permits,
by the Senate to a final year degree student with the best performance or project in one
of the following fields of the Social Sciences; Sociology, Environmental Science, Law,
Public Administration and Political Sciences. The Senate may award the prize jointly
or, exceptionally and on the recommendation of the Board of the Faculty of Social
Sciences, make no award where an insufficiently high standard has been achieved. The
prize shall be in books worth P150 chosen by the successful candidate.
3. Vice Chancellor’s Prize
This prize was established in 1989 as a result of a generous donation to the University
of Botswana by the Honourable Mr D. N. Magang and his family. The prize may be
awarded annually by the Senate to the most outstanding full-time first degree
graduating student(s). This student(s) should have made a significant contribution
to student life, should be of good conduct and should have consistently outstanding
leadership qualities during his/her period as a student. The prize will be in the form of the
following: a miniature trophy on which the name of the recipient will be appropriately
engraved, a scroll duly signed by the Vice Chancellor and the donor during his life time,
and a shield on which the name of the prize and the recipient’s name will be inscribed.
The shield will be placed at a conspicuous place on the University Campus. The Senate
may award the prize jointly or make no award at all, if there is no candidate qualified
for the prize.
4. Michael Hamlyn Prize
This prize was established in 1987 by the staff members of the Faculty of Science
in memory of Mr. Michael Hamlyn, a South African refugee student who was the
only member of the University of Botswana killed by a South African Government
commando force that invaded Gaborone in the early hours of Friday 14th June 1985.
He had just completed the Degree of Bachelor of Science, First Class when he was killed.
The prize may be awarded annually by the Senate to a student who studied and showed
considerable ability in Mathematics and Physics in the second year of the BSc Degree
programme and who demonstrated maturity in his/her relationship with other students
and staff. The Awarding Committee, comprising the Dean of the Faculty of Science,
the Head and an elected member of the Mathematics Department, and the Head and
elected member of the Physics Department, will make a recommendation through the

Science Faculty Board to the Deputy Vice Chancellor. The prize will be in the form of
books worth P200 chosen by the winner.
5. Bank of Botswana Prize
This prize was established in 1989 and may be awarded annually by the Senate to
a Motswana graduating student with the best marks in Accountancy and Business
Administration and Economics. The recipient will be invited to attend the annual the
Bankers Banquet.
6. PriceWaterhouseCoopers Prize
This prize was established in 1990 as a result of a generous donation to the University
of Botswana by PriceWaterhouseCoopers. The prize may be awarded annually by the
Senate to a second year Motswana Bachelor of Accounting student with the best overall
performance in any particular year. The prize will be in the form of books worth P500
chosen by the winner and a floating trophy. The winner will also be attached to the Firm
during the vacation periods and will receive an allowance. The Firm will also pay for the
student’s registration with the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants in the
U.K. or other approved body.
7. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Education
This prize was established in 1984 and was funded by members of the academic staff of
the Faculty of Education in 1993. The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to a final year student(s) adjudged academically the most outstanding in the
Faculty of Education who should have obtained at least 4.0 CGPA. The student(s) should
be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of books worth P200 chosen by
the winner and a shield. The name of the recipient will be inscribed on the shield to be
placed in the Dean’s office.
8. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Science
This prize was established in 1984 and was funded by members of the academic staff
of the Faculty of Science in 1993. The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to a final year student(s) adjudged academically the most outstanding in the
Faculty of Science who should have obtained least 4.0 CGPA. The student(s) should be
of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of books worth P200 chosen by
the winner and a shield. The name of the recipient will be inscribed on the shield to be
placed in the Dean’s office.
9. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Humanities
This prize was established in 1984 and was funded by members of the academic staff of
the Faculty of Humanities in 1992. The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to a final year student(s) adjudged academically the most outstanding in the
Faculty of Humanities, who should have obtained least 4.0 CGPA. The student(s) should
be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of books worth P200 chosen by
the winner and a shield. The name of the recipient will be inscribed on the shield to be
placed in the Dean’s office.
10. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Social Sciences
This prize was established in 1984 and was funded by members of the academic
staff of the Faculty of Social Sciences in 1992. The prize may be awarded annually
by the University Senate to a final year student(s) adjudged academically the most
outstanding in the Faculty of Social Sciences who should have obtained least 4.0
CGPA. The student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of
books worth P200 chosen by the winner and a shield. The name of the recipient will be
inscribed on the shield to be placed in the Dean’s office.
11. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Business
This prize was established in 2001 and was funded by members of the academic staff
of the Faculty of Business in 2000. The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to a final year student adjudged academically the most outstanding in the
Faculty of Business who should have obtained least 4.0 CGPA. The student should be of
acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of cash to the value of P400, a shield
and a Certificate of Outstanding Performance signed by the Dean of the Faculty. The
name of the recipient will be inscribed on the shield to be placed in the Dean’s office.
12. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Health Sciences
The prize was established in 2014 and was funded by members of the academic staff of
Faculty of Health Sciences in 2014.The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to a final year student adjudged academically the most outstanding in the
Faculty of Health Sciences who should obtained at least 4.0 CGPA. The student should
be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of cash to the value of P500.00
and a shield. The name of the recipient will be inscribed on the shield to be placed in
the Dean’s office.
13. BOMAID Excellence Award
The award was established through a generous donation of P5, 000.00 to the University
of Botswana by Botswana Medical Aid Society (BOMAID). The prize may be awarded

22

GENERAL
annually by the University Senate to the most outstanding final year degree student in
the Faculty of Health Sciences. The prize will be in the form of P1000.00 cash.
14. BPOMAS Prize for Best Graduating Student
The award was established through a generous contribution to sponsor three prizes
each year for the next 10 years to the University of Botswana by Botswana Public
Officers Medical Aid Scheme (BPOMAS). The prize may be awarded annually by the
University Senate to the best graduating students in each of the following; School
of Allied Health Professions, School of Nursing and School of Public Health. The prize
will be in the form of cash worth P1500.00 each for the first year. Subsequent years,
BPOMAS will tailor make these awards to be a prestigious award.
15. Deloitte and Touche Prize
This prize was established in 1994 through a donation from the Deloitte and Touche
Accounting Firm. The prize may be awarded annually by the University Senate to the
best final year all round Accountancy student. The prize will be P1,500 cash.
16. De Beers Private Sector Trust Prize
This prize was established in 1996 through a generous donation from the De Beers
Botswana (Pty) Ltd. to the University of Botswana. The prize may be awarded annually
by the University Senate to the best graduating degree MBA student(s) who have
obtained the highest overall minimum average of 70 percent. The recipient should
have had a clean academic record and also should not have repeated a course or have
been the subject of disciplinary action while a student. In the event that a graduating
student with the highest overall average is disqualified from winning this prize because
of disciplinary action, the prize will be awarded to the next best graduating student
with the best marks. The prize will be in the form of books worth P1,000 and a floating
imbua plaque on which the name of the recipient(s) shall be inscribed.
17. British High Commissioner’s Prize
This prize was established in 1990 through a donation from the then British High
Commissioner Mr. Brian Smith. The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to a final year degree student(s) adjudged academically the most outstanding
in either the Faculty of Education (Department of Mathematics and Science) or the
Faculty of Science. The student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be a
floating trophy.
18. The Builders World Prize
This prize was established in 1995 with seed money donated by Builders World
Botswana (Pty) Ltd. The prize may be awarded annually to the most outstanding final
year BSc Degree female student in the Faculty of Science with a degree classification
of at least 2(i). The prize will be in the form of books worth P200 and a floating shield
engraved with the donor’s and winner’s(s’) names.
19. The John Cooke Prize for Environmental Conservation
This prize was established in 1993 in honour of Professor John H. Cooke (Founding
Head of the Department of Environmental Science). It was established with money
collected by the Department. The prize may be awarded annually to the best graduating
student in Environmental Science with a degree classification of at least 2(ii) and a
record of active interest in environmental issues. The prize will be in the form of books
worth P200 selected by the winner.
20. Botswana Institute of Accountants Prize (BIA)
This prize was established in 1994 through a generous donation to the University of
Botswana by the Botswana Institute of Accountants. The prize may be awarded annually
by the University Senate to the most outstanding graduating Bachelor of Accountancy
Motswana student(s) who must have obtained least 4.0 CGPA. The prize will be in the
form of books worth P300, a shield for the winner with his/her name inscribed on it and
a floating shield on which the name of the recipient(s) shall be inscribed.
21. CISNA ‘93 Information Technology Prize: Computer Science
This prize was established in 1996 through a donation from the CISNA ‘93 Conference
Organising Committee. The prize may be awarded annually by the University Senate
to the best final year degree student in the Department of Computer Science with at
least 4.0 CGPA. The student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the
form of P500 cash and a floating shield on which the name of the recipient and prize
will be inscribed.
22. CISNA ‘93 Information Technology Prize: Engineering and Technology
This prize was established in 1996 through a donation from the CISNA ‘93 Conference
Organising Committee. The prize may be awarded annually by the University Senate to
the best final year degree student(s) in the Department of Engineering and Technology
with at least 4.0 CGPA. The student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will
be in the form of P500 cash and a floating shield on which the name of the recipient(s)
and prize will be inscribed.

INFORMATION

23. Michael Crowder Prize for History and Archaeology
This prize was established in 1996 and was funded by members of the academic staff
of the History Department, well-wishers and supporters. The prize may be awarded
by the University Senate to the best single or double major graduating student(s) in
History Or Archaeology who should have obtained a degree classification of 2(i), and
who should have obtained least 4.0 CGPA. The prize will be in the form of books worth
P200 chosen by the winner.
24. The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) Prize:
This prize was established in 1996/97 through a donation made to the University
of Botswana by the Botswana Branch of the Chartered Institute of Management
Accountants. The prize was initially awarded annually by the Senate to the best final
year student in the Certificate in Accounting and Business Studies (CABS) who should
have obtained at least 4.0 CGPA. When UB phased out CABS, this Prize was changed
to be awarded to the best final year student in Strategic Management (MGT400).
The student should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of books
chosen by the winner, and a plaque retained by the University in which the name of the
recipient, donor and prize shall be inscribed. The Senate may award the prize jointly or
make no award at all if there is no candidate qualified for the prize.
25. The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants Prize: DABS
This prize was established in 1996/97 through a donation made to the University
of Botswana by the Botswana Branch of the Chartered Institute of Management
Accountants. The prize may be awarded annually by the Senate to the best final year
student in the Diploma in Accounting and Business Studies who should have obtained
at least 4.0 CGPA. The student should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in
the form of books worth P200 chosen by the winner, and a plaque retained by the
University in which the name of the recipient, donor and prize shall be inscribed. The
Senate may award the prize jointly or make no award at all if there is no candidate
qualified for the prize.
26. Botswana Institute of Engineers Prize
This prize was established in 1996 through a generous donation to the University of
Botswana by the Botswana Institute of Engineers. The prize may be awarded annually
by the University Senate to the most outstanding student(s) in the final year of the
Bachelor of Engineering Degree programme and the student(s) should be of acceptable
conduct. The prize will be in the form of P1000 cash.
27. Dean’s Prize: Faculty of Engineering and Technology
This prize was established in 1996/97 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the 1995 Maintenance of Engineering Facilities (MEF ‘95) Conference Organising
Committee. The prize may be awarded annually by the University Senate to a final
year degree student(s) adjudged academically the most outstanding in the Faculty
of Engineering and Technology who should have obtained at least 4.0 CGPA. The
student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize shall be in the form of books
worth P200 chosen by the winner, a scroll given to the recipient on which the name of
the recipient, donor and prize shall be inscribed, and a shield retained by the University
on which the name of the recipient and prize shall be inscribed. The shield shall be
placed in the Dean’s office.
28. The Lady Olebile Masire Prize
This prize was established in 1996/97 as a result of a generous donation to the University
of Botswana by Lady Masire. The prize may be awarded annually by the Senate to the
best final year degree student(s) in the Faculty of Engineering and Technology. The
student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize shall be in the form of a scroll
given to the recipient on which the name of the recipient, donor and prize shall be
inscribed, and a shield retained by the University on which the name of the recipient,
donor and prize shall be inscribed.
29. The BDF Prize for Physical Education
This prize was established in 1996/97 as a result of a donation to the University of
Botswana by the Botswana Defence Force. The prize may be awarded annually by the
Senate to the best final year degree student(s) in the Physical Education programme.
The student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize shall be in the form of a
trophy given to the recipient on which the name of the recipient, donor and prize shall
be inscribed.
30. Setswana Prize
This prize was established in 1998/99 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the National Setswana Language Council. The prize may be awarded annually by the
Senate to the student(s) with the best performance in African Languages and Literature
in a single or combined major with a cumulative GPA of at least 4.0. The student(s)
should be of acceptable conduct. The prize shall be in the form of a symbolic cultural
artefact, depicting Setswana culture, given to the recipient. It will bear on it the name
of prize, prize winner, donor and year of award. The Senate may award the prize jointly
by using the interest money to purchase two or several cultural artefacts.

23

GENERAL

INFORMATION

31. The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants Prize in Management (ACCA)
This prize was established in 1996/97 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the Botswana Branch of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants. The
prize may be awarded annually by the Senate to the most outstanding Bachelor of
Business Administration Management final year student(s) with at least 4.0 CGPA. The
recipient should not have repeated a course or year of the programme and should be of
acceptable conduct. The prize shall be in the form of a scroll on which the name of the
recipient, donor and prize shall be inscribed and a plaque retained by the University on
which the name of the recipient, donor and prize shall be inscribed.
32.The Indian High Commissioner’s Prize
This prize was established in 1997/98 as a result of a generous donation from the
High Commission of India to the University of Botswana. The prize may be awarded
annually by the Senate to the most outstanding post-graduate student in the Faculty
of Humanities. Preference will be given to a student(s) who undertook studies on some
aspect of Asia, particularly of India, if any. The student(s) should be of acceptable
conduct. The prize will be in the form of a momento worth P170 bearing the name of
the prize, the achievement and the recipient’s name inscribed on it, and cash or books
worth P300 chosen by the winner.
33. The Ernst and Young Prize
This prize was established in 1998/99 through a generous donation to the University of
Botswana by the Ernst and Young firm of Certified Public Accountants. The prize may
be awarded annually by the Senate to the overall top three Bachelor of Accountancy
programme first year students and the best Financial Accounting and Auditing third
year student(s). The student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the
form of cash worth P350 and P750 per student for first year and third year students
respectively.
34. Media Communications (Pty) Ltd Prize
A prize awarded to the student(s) with the best performance (not below 70%) in
each of the courses: integrated marketing communications, international marketing,
marketing ethics, product and brand marketing, retail management, services marketing,
contemporary issues in social marketing, strategic marketing.
35. Probe Market Intelligence Prize
A prize awarded to the student with the best performance (not below 70%) in course
Marketing Research.
36. Sharma and Associates Prize
The prize was established in 2002. It is awarded to a Motswana student with highest
grade in Taxation in the undergraduate programme. In addition, the winner must not
have failed any course in the programme and must also have a good conduct record.
The prize will be either a cash award or books.
37. Annual BOCCIM Award
The prize was established in 2005. It is awarded annually to the overall best Motswana
3rd year student in Bachelor of Business Administration (Marketing) with a CGPA of at
least 4.5. The prize will be in the form of a special BOCCIM shield and a cash worth of
P2000.00.
38. IEE Region 8 AFRICON’04 Prize
This prize was established in 2004/5 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the 2004 IEEE Region 8 AFRICON Conference Organizing Committee. A prize awarded
to the most outstanding graduating Electrical and Electronic degree student with a
Cumulative GPA of at least 4.5. The prize will be in the form of P2000 cash.
39. M.L.A Kgasa Longman Prize
A prize awarded to the best dissertation or research project (With a cumulative GPA
of at least 4.0).
40. English Prize
A prize awarded to the best graduating student in English Language and Literature
(With a cumulative GPA of at least 4.0).
41. Chibanda, Makgalemele, Ngcongco Prize
A prize awarded to the best graduating student in the Department of Law
42. Law Society of Botswana Prize
A prize awarded to the best graduating student in Clinical Legal Education.
43. Helfer & Co Prize
A prize awarded to the best graduating student in Conveyancing.

44. The Lady Ruth Khama Prize
A prize awarded to the graduating student(s) in Social Work with degree CGPA of at
least 4.0 and who performed exceptionally well during fieldwork placement/community
service.
45. IASTED 2006 PRIZE
This prize was established in 2006/7 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the IASTED 2006 Conference Organizing Committee. A prize is awarded annually
to one graduating student in the Faculty of Engineering and Technology with a final
cumulative GPA of at least 4.5. The student should be of acceptable conduct. The prize
will be in the form of P1000 cash
46. ITALTSWANA CONSTRUCTION COMPANY PRIZE
This prize was established in 2008 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the Italtswana Construction Company (ICC). A prize is awarded to the graduating
student in the BEng Construction Engineering and Management degree with the best
Cumulative GPA of at least 4.5. The prize will be in the form of P1000 cash.
47. BOTSWANA TELECOMUNICATIONS CORPORATION PRIZE
This prize was established in 2007 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the Botswana Telecommunication (BTC). The prize may be awarded annually by the
University Senate to the most outstanding student in the final year of the Bachelor of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering Degree programme and the student should be of
acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the form of P2000 cash.
48. MASCOM PRIZE
This prize was established in 2010 through a donation to the University of Botswana by
the Mascom Wireless Botswana. The prize may be awarded annually by the University
Senate to the most outstanding student in the final year of the Bachelor of Electrical
Engineering Degree programme and the student(s) should be of acceptable conduct.
The prize will be in the form of P2000 cash.
49. FMA Architects Prize
This prize was established in 2010 through a donation to the University of Botswana
by the FMA Architects. The prize may be awarded annually by the University Senate to
the most outstanding student in the final year of the Bachelor of Architecture Degree
programme and the student(s) should be of acceptable conduct. The prize will be in the
form of P2000 cash and certificate of achievement signed by the HOD and the Dean.
50. Botswana Development Corporation Prize
The prize was established in 2005 through an endowment sum of the P10000.00. It is
awarded annually to the overall best graduating student in the BBA (Marketing). The
prize will be in the form of cash.
51. Dr M. A. Chamme Prize
The prize was established in 2009 by the Department of Marketing as a gesture of
appreciation of the contribution made by Dr Mbaki Andrew Chamme to the department.
It is awarded annually to a student with the best course grade in Advertising
Management. The prize will be in the form of a floating trophy.
52. Choppies Group of Companies Prize
The prize was established in 2009. It is awarded annually to a Motswana student with
the best course grade in Entrepreneurship and New Business Formation. The prize will
be in the form of cash.
53. Moores Rowland Award
The prize was established in 2009. It is awarded annually to a Motswana student with
the highest grade in Auditing. The prize will be in the form of cash.
54. Fleming Asset Management Prize
The prize was established in 2009. It is awarded annually to a Motswana student with
the highest grade in Investment and Analysis and Portfolio management. The prize will
be in the form of cash.
55. Stanbic Investments Award
The award was established in 2005 through a donation of P10000.00 to the University
of Botswana by the Stanbic Investment Management Services. It is awarded annually
to the best graduating Motswana student in Bachelor of Finance with at least 75%
aggregate in years 3 and 4. The award will be in the form of a floating trophy and cash.
56. Mathata Gasennelwe Prize
The prize was established in 2010. It is awarded annually to the overall best graduating
Motswana student in Bachelor of Business Administration (Marketing) The prize will
entail books to the value of P1000.00 and a certificate.
57. Mascom Prize

24

GENERAL
The prize was established in 2009. It is awarded annually to the best graduating
Motswana student in Bachelor of Information Systems (Business Information Systems).
The prize will be in the form of cash.
58. Cresta Hospitality Excellence Award
The award was established in 2010. It is awarded annually to two best graduating
students in Bachelor of Tourism and Hospitality. The award will be in the form of a
trophy, cash and internship for both students.
59. Peermont Global Botswana Limited Prize
The prize was established in 2010. It is awarded annually to the best overall graduating
student in the Bachelor of Tourism and Hospitality. The prize will be in the form of a
trophy and cash.
60. Botswana IFSC Prize
The prize was established in 2009. It is awarded annually to the best 3rd year student
in Bachelor of Finance. It will be in the form of Cash.
6.1 Residence Regulations
3.1.1 Full-time students normally live in approved Halls of Residence on campus.
However, because accommodation is not enough for everyone, some students have
to live off campus. Accommodation, where available, is offered by the Department of
Student Welfare.
3.1.2 Students who are accommodated on campus are required to follow regulations
and guidelines for Halls of Residence.
3.1.3 Off campus students are not allowed to lodge in Halls of Residence without
permission from the Department of Student Welfare. This also applies to non-UB
students. 4. Discipline Regulations Pursuant to Statute 8(ii) of the Statutes of the
University of Botswana, the following are and shall be, until amended, the Discipline
Regulations.
4.1 Misconduct Under the Statute
4.12 A student shall be guilty of misconduct if he/she:
i)
Engages in conduct (on or off the premises of the University) which discredits the
good name or is prejudicial to the peace, good order and good government of the
University;
ii)
Fails to comply with any Statute of the University;
iii) Willfully destroys, damages, defaces, alienates or appropriates to himself/herself
any property of the University; iv) Infringes the regulations of the University for
the control of Library materials, examinations, class tests and assignments or any
other approved regulations;
v)
Fails to comply with such instruction relating to his/her conduct as a student as
he/she may receive from any member of the University staff in the exercise of his/
her duties;
vi)
Infringes the traffic rules of the University;
vii) Is convicted in any court of law of an offence which in the opinion of the Vice
Chancellor is serious enough to warrant disciplinary action.
4.2 Disciplinary Procedures
4.21 Any charge of misconduct shall in the first instance be laid before the Vice
Chancellor.
4.22 i) The Vice Chancellor may decide the case after taking such advice or seeking such
evidence as he/she considers desirable or may refer the case for investigation to a
sole investigator or may appoint a Disciplinary Committee with such membership
as he/she deems appropriate.
ii)
The Vice Chancellor may forbid such student to attend lectures and/or participate
in any student activities whilst the charge against him/her is being investigated.
4.23 Where the Vice Chancellor refers the case to a sole investigator or appoints a
Disciplinary Committee and refers the case to the same Committee, the following
procedures shall be followed:
i)
The student shall be given at least two clear days’ notice in writing of the time
and place of the hearing and of the nature and substance of the charge against
him/her.
ii)
The Vice Chancellor may designate a member of staff to be present at the hearing
to present the case against the student. The sole investigator or the Disciplinary
Committee may call witnesses and interrogate them concerning the matters at
issue.
iii) The hearing before the sole investigator or the Disciplinary Committee shall be
conducted in private.
iv) The Secretary of the Disciplinary Committee who shall be appointed by the Vice
Chancellor, or the sole investigator, as the case may be, shall ensure that an
accurate record is kept of all the proceedings and of the evidence pertaining to
the case. The Director, Legal Services Office shall have custody of records.

INFORMATION

v)

The sole investigator or the Committee, as the case may be, shall prepare a
written statement of the decision together with a brief summary of the reason(s)
thereof.
vi) When a student is rusticated for a period longer than a semester, or is dismissed
from the University, an appeal may be made to the Council and the student shall
be informed of his/her right to appeal.
vii) On receipt of a memorandum of appeal, the Vice Chancellor shall bring before the
Council, which shall meet in special session if the Chairperson deems it necessary,
without delay, a statement of the reasons for the decision, together with a
summary of the evidence on which that decision is based, and the student’s
written memorandum of appeal. The case shall then be decided by the Council
on the basis of the material thus presented.
viii) Such appeals may be considered by the whole Council or a Committee of not
less than three members appointed by the Chairperson for the purpose. Council
or its Committee may make its decision on the basis of the minutes or records
of any previous hearing and students shall be given seven clear days’ notice of
the day and time when the appeal will be heard and, in any case in which oral
representations of any kind are heard, shall be given the opportunity to hear and
cross examine any person making such representations. I
x) The decision of Council shall be final.
4.3 Criminal Proceedings
4.31 A finding of guilt or an acquittal in a criminal court shall not preclude proceedings
against a student in respect of the same incident, but any sentence or order pronounced
shall be taken into account in the imposition of any penalty. Further, the finding of a
criminal court in respect of any incident which is the subject of proceedings against a
student, may be used in evidence in those proceedings.

Examinations Regulations
4.41 Information and Guidance for Candidates
All candidates will be assumed to have read the following rules and regulations.
4.42 Examination Venues
Examinations are normally held in the University and its Centres. The venue of each
examination will be specified in the examination timetable. Candidates are responsible
for knowing in advance the rooms in which they write examinations.
4.43 Examination Numbers
You must write your Student Identity number and full names on the cover of your
answer book and any other materials used. Make sure that you write your ID Number
and full names on the examination materials clearly and correctly. Candidates must
produce a valid Student ID card at each of their examinations and display it on the
examination desk/table for checking by the invigilator.
4.44 Time of Arrival
Examinations commence at times stated in the examination timetable. Candidates
must confirm the times of each of their examinations. Candidates will be admitted into
the examination room approximately 20 minutes before the start of each examination
session. Candidates will be given 10 minutes reading time prior to the advertised time
of exam commencement. Candidates must not make notes or commence writing
during this period.
4.45 Absence from an Examination
i) If a candidate fails to take an examination for no good reason, special papers will
not be set and the candidate will be deemed to have failed the particular examination.
Losing, misreading or failure to consult the examination timetable are not acceptable
reasons for absence or late arrival at an examination.
ii) In the case of absence from an examination through ill health, the candidate (or
someone acting on his/her behalf) must submit a relevant medical certificate which
must relate to the day or period of the examination. Evidence of illness will not normally
be taken into account unless substantiated by a medical certificate. Such evidence must
be received within 14 days after the day of examination in order for it to receive full
consideration.
iii) It is the responsibility of the candidate to arrange with his/her doctor for any
medical evidence to be sent to the relevant Head of Department
iv) In the case of absence from an examination due to serious causes (other than ill
health of the candidate), the candidate (or someone acting on his/her behalf ) must
submit to the relevant head of Department: (a) evidence of the cause, where possible
and, (b) a written explanation of the absence.
4.46 Entry into the Examination Room
Candidates will be told when they can enter the examination room and silence must be
observed on entry and whilst in the examination room.

25

GENERAL

INFORMATION

4.461 Seating Arrangements in the Examination Room
Invigilators and exam assistants will guide candidates to their seat.
4.462 Special Arrangements
Candidates who have a disability or suffer from any illness or condition that will require
special examination arrangements should inform the Faculty office well in advance.
Where feasible, special examination arrangements will be made.
4.463 Procedures During the Examination
Candidates must immediately on taking their examination seats fill in the attendance
slip provided.. Answer books and other requisite stationery will be provided. Candidates
should carefully read the instructions on the front cover of the answer books and then
enter their candidate’s ID number and other details required. No part of the book may
be torn off and all books used must be left on the desks. Rough work must be done in
the answer book and should be crossed out to show that it is not part of the answer.

4.471 End of the Examination
Candidates will be told to stop writing at the end of the examination by the supervisor.
Candidates in the room should then remain seated until they have filled all the details
required on the answer book and the scripts have been collected. It is the responsibility
of the candidate to ensure that all the additional loose sheets, charts or papers and
supplementary answer books are enclosed in the first answer book. Candidates may not
take any examination materials, used or unused, out of the examination room other
than:
a)
The material they brought into the examination room;
b)
The question paper (where permissible).
4.472 Penalties for Infringement of Examination Regulations
All candidates will be assumed to have read the above Regulations. The following steps
will be taken to impose penalties on any candidate who infringes upon examination
regulations.

4.464 Starting the Examination
You will be told by the supervisor when you can start the examination and you should
not look at the examination question paper before you are told to do so.

i)

4.465 Late Arrival
Candidates who are more than one hour late will not be admitted into the examination
room. Candidates who arrive late will not be allowed extra time to complete the
examination.

ii)

4.466 Examination Reading Time
On being told to start reading, candidates will check that the question paper is the
correct one, all questions are legible and all pages are attached. Discrepancies must be
reported to the invigilator for attention.
4.467 Temporary Withdrawal
A candidate leaving the examination room temporarily for personal reasons will
be accompanied by an invigilator or other authorised person. (NB: Smoking is not
considered a suitable reason for leaving the examination room.) The candidate will not
take the question paper, answer book(s) and other materials and must not consult or
attempt to consult any materials or persons outside the room that may assist him/her
in writing the examination.

iii)
		
		
		
		
iv)

Any candidate who is considered by the invigilator to be committing
an infringement of the rules will be reported and appropriate action 		
taken. The supervisor has the power to dismiss a candidate from the 		
room and compel him/her to surrender the script if deemed to be guilty of
serious misconduct.
In all cases of misconduct, the candidate will be warned that his/her 		
conduct will be reported and that the decision as to whether the work 		
will be accepted or disciplinary action taken rests with the authorities.
When it is determined that the student has committed misconduct 		
calculated to affect improper examination performance:
a) He/she may be refused credit for any courses or examinations 		
completed or attempted;
b) The results may be withheld;
c) He/she may be suspended from writing the examinations;
d) He/she may be dismissed from the University for repeated misconduct;
A candidate who wishes to appeal shall follow the procedure set out in
the Disciplinary Regulations.

Academic Appeals and Procedures

4.468 Leaving the Examination Room
Candidates may not leave the examination room during the first hour of the
examination session unless they feel unwell. Candidates must also not leave during the
last ten minutes of the examination and must remain seated until all the examination
scripts have been collected and checked by the invigilators.
If a candidate has completed his/her paper before the specified time and wishes to
leave, he/she must do so as quietly as possible, so as not to disturb the other candidates.
Such a candidate will not be allowed to re-enter the examination room. Permission to
leave at any time must be requested from the supervisor.

A. Continuous Assessment
Appeals student may request a review of continuous assessment mark(s) and decisions
during the course of the year.

4.469 Illness During Examination
Candidates who fall ill during the examination should inform the supervisor or
invigilator who shall act or advise as appropriate.

2. Department/Programme
If the complaint has not been satisfactorily resolved at Step 1, the student may approach
the Head of Department (or Dean if the Head of Department is the instructor, or DVC/
AA if the Faculty/School Dean is the instructor) for review, mediation or resolution. The
student should attach to the written complaint all relevant evidence as is available
to substantiate the complaint. The Head of Department shall investigate and may
endeavour to resolve the matter, or may seek further advice/ recommendation from the
Departmental Board or other persons as he/she thinks fit. The Head of Department may
direct that corrective action be taken when justified.

4.470 Misconduct
The following will be construed as misconduct in an examination:
a)
Taking into the examination room, or possessing or using whilst in that
room any unauthorised materials or items. Misconduct is presumed from
the fact of possession unless an innocent explanation is obvious or is 		
established by the candidate;
b)
Aiding or attempting to aid, obtaining or attempting to obtain 		
aid from another candidate. 					
Misconduct is presumed from the fact of communication unless an 		
innocent explanation is obvious or is established by thecandidate;
c)
Consulting or trying to consult during the examination any books, notes
or other unauthorised materials, or another candidate while temporarily
outside the examination room;
d)
Impersonating another candidate or allowing oneself to be impersonated;
e)
Attempting to influence the examiners or other University officials;
f)
Failing to obey or comply with any of the examination regulations, 		
or instructions of the supervisor/ invigilator acting within the scope 		
of his/her authority. Such repeated behaviour as may in the view of the
supervisor prejudice the performance of other candidates. It should be 		
noted that the supervisor is empowered to discontinue the examination
of a candidate suspected of misconduct and to expel him/herfrom the 		
examination room.

Steps in the Process of an Assessment Appeal
1. Course Instructor
First discuss concern with the course instructor promptly upon receipt of the assessment
mark or decision in an attempt to resolve any differences. The student has the right to
take the matter directly to the Head of Department if need be.

3. Faculty/School
If the complaint is not resolved at Step 2, either the Head of Department or the student
will refer the written complaint to the Dean of the Faculty/School for investigation,
review and resolution. The Dean will review the appeal, discuss with the student,
the Head of Department, and any other persons concerned, and may refer it to the
Faculty/School Executive for further advice/ recommendation. The Dean may direct that
corrective action be taken when justified. He/ she will report his/her decision to the
student and the instructor.
4. Academic Appeals Committee
Should the complaint not be satisfactorily resolved at Step 3, either the student or
Dean may refer the written appeal to the Senate Academic Appeals Committee for
review and resolution. The Committee will review the appeal and the appeal decisions
made at earlier steps of the appeals process. The Committee shall determine its own
procedure. The student(s) and the instructor concerned may attend the hearings to
hear and answer allegations and to present their arguments. The Committee shall not
itself re-mark/re-grade the continuous assessment script but shall direct that this be
independently done where appropriate. The Committee’s decision shall be binding on

26

GENERAL
all parties, may not be appealed, and takes effect when issued.
5. The Committee may refuse to proceed with an appeal or complaint if it concludes
that the appeal or complaint is vexatious or malicious.
6. Appeals which challenge the professional academic judgement of individual
examiners or Boards of Examiners on the examination performance of students will
not be permitted.
7. Victimisation or harassment of students who lodge complaints is prohibited.
Procedures relating to Sexual Harassment are dealt with separately below.
8. No fee shall be paid.
B. Examination Appeals
Students may request a review of their examination marks, results and academic
decisions. However, examination appeals against externally moderated examination
marks will not normally be considered unless evidence exists that errors/omissions/
irregularities had occurred or new evidence exists which necessitates a review of the
mark, result or decision.
Appeals are heard on the following grounds:
1. New evidence: i.e. evidence of circumstances affecting the student’s examination
performance that, through no fault of the student, could not reasonably have been
presented at an earlier date.
2. Procedural or other irregularities in the conduct of the examination.
3. Procedural irregularities in the marking of the examination, e.g. evidence that the
scripts have been insufficiently or incorrectly marked.
4. Evidence of prejudice or bias on the part of one or more examiners.
5. Inappropriate advice from members of administrative or academic staff on matters
affecting the student’s examination candidature or performance.

INFORMATION

decision is final.
6. The HoD or Deputy Dean or Appeals Committee may refuse or accept the appeal.
If the appeal is accepted, the appellant’ examination script shall be re-marked. The
original marker or a second marker shall be asked to review the examination script
along with a representative sample of all the examination scripts in the course. The
appellant’s scrip shall be identifiable. If the review leads to a lower grade/mark the
original grade/mark shall not be lowered.
C. Complaints Relating to Individual
Course Instructors
A student who has a grievance relating to a course instructor (e.g. unsatisfactory
teaching, unsatisfactory relationship with the course instructor) may follow these steps:
1. Raise concern with the course instructor as soon as the problem or difficulty arises.
Most grievances can be resolved amicably and quickly in this manner. The student
may take the matter directly to the Head of Department if need be.
2. Concerns related to an instructor that cannot be resolved at Step 1 should be
discussed with the Head of Department (or Faculty Dean, if the Department Head is
the instructor, or DVC/AA if the Dean is instructor).
3. If the complaint is not resolved at Step 2 above, the student may follow the Steps
as in 1.3 through 1.5 under Section 1 above. The complaint review process is
accomplished in a collegial nonjudicial atmosphere rather than an adversarial one
and allows the parties involved to participate as appropriate. Complaints must be
raised and resolved promptly and as soon as they arise during the course of the year.
The student and instructor may enlist the aid of a neutral third party (e.g. counselor,
academic advisor) to assist.
For further details of the appeals procedure, please contact the:
Department of Academic Services,
Tel: (+267) 355 2018/2016 Fax: (+267) 3585 103.
University of Botswana

6. Failure of the University to implement its agreed procedures and regulations.
Grounds for appeal must be specific. Reasons such as ‘I deserved a better grade’, or ‘I
thought I did better’ are unclear and unhelpful. Appeals which challenge the professional
academic judgment of examiners on the student’s examination performance will not be
considered. Appeals or representations are allowed as a way of ensuring that as far as
possible all relevant circumstances surrounding examination performance are brought
to light and taken into account in formulating results and decisions. Appeals should be
lodged with the relevant Head of Department. Examination appeals must state clearly
the grounds for appeal and should include all relevant information. The burden of
proof is on the student, and the written appeal should state and support with available
evidence the grounds for appeal. The Examinations Appeals Committee will consider
the details of the appeal and decide whether the appeal is valid, and if so, what relief
should be provided. The Committee does not usually hold hearings. The examination
script may be re-marked only if the Committee so directs; there is no automatic remarking/ re-grading of scripts. However, for all appeals and queries received from
students, the marks and/or results will be checked for errors, omissions and conformity
with regulations, and a correction made where necessary. The Committee’s decision
is final and takes effect when issued. Examination scripts and the marks awarded for
individual examination questions/answers are not shown to students.
Procedure for Handling Queries and Appeals on Final Course Grades and Marks
1. Students shall submit queries and appeals within one month from the official date
of the publication of Cumulative GPAs and academic results. Queries and appeals
received after the deadline date will not be processed except where the delay was
caused by factors reasonably beyond the student’s control.
2. If a student feels that a final course grade/mark is inaccurate, the student may
lodge a query with the Head of the Academic Department/Unit concerned. The
Examiner(s) will check the continuous assessment and examination marks for errors
and omissions, and if an error is detected, submit to the Head of Department a
change of course grade or mark in the approved Course Grade/Mark Change Form.
3. If the student feels that a final course grade/mark was unfairly assigned, the student
may submit a written appeal of the grade/mark to the Head of the Department
(HoD) concerned. The HoD shall process the appeal within one week of receipt of
the written appeal.
4. If the complaint is not resolved, the HoD shall forward the student’s appeal to the
Deputy Dean. The Deputy Dean shall process the appeal within one week of receipt
of the written appeal.
5. If the complaint is not resolved, the Deputy Dean shall forward the student’s appeal
to the Secretary of the Senate Academic Appeals Committee. The Committee
shall process the appeal within two weeks of receipt of the written appeal and its

27

FACULTY OF BUSINESS

DEAN
Prof J. Pansiri
)BA (UB), MA (Essex) PhD (Ballarat

DEPUTY DEAN
Mr G. Themba
)BCom (UB), MBA (Wales

FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR
B. Paledi
,)BCom (UB), MBA (UB
)MA(Development Studies)(UB

MANAGER, HUMAN RESOURCE

ACCOUNTING & FINANCE

M. P. Tshebo

MANAGEMENT

)BA (UB), MSc HRM (Salford

MARKETING
TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY

28

Programmes are categorized as follows: Part-time
• Diploma in Accounting & Business Studies
Full-time and Distance mode
• Bachelor of Accountancy
• Bachelor of Finance
• Bachelor of Business Administration (Management)
• Bachelor of Business Administration (Marketing)
Programmes offered only on full time basis
• Bachelor of Information Systems (Business
Information Systems)
• Bachelor of Business Administration (Tourism &
Hospitality Management)
• Bachelor of Business Administration (Management
• Bachelor of Business Administration
(Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Development)
• Bachelor of Business Administration (Logistics and
Supply Chain Management
• Bachelor of Business Administration (International
Business)
Special Regulations for the Faculty of Business
Subject to the provisions of General Academic
Regulations 00.0 to 20.4, the following special
regulations shall apply.
Entrance Requirement
a) Admission shall be as stipulated in General Academic
Regulations 20.2, 20.21 and 20.22 with the specific
requirement of a grade C (60 percent) in English
and Mathematics. Subject to the General Regulation
00.52 in respect of the Mature Age Entry Scheme,
applicants to the Bachelor of Accountancy, Bachelor
of Finance, Bachelor of Information Systems
(Business Information Systems), Bachelor of Business
Administration (Management) and Bachelor of
Business Administration (Marketing), Tourism &
Hospitality Management shall undergo an aptitude
test.
b) Students with a Diploma in Accounting and Business
Studies (DABS) or equivalent with a cumulative
GPA of 2.00 or above can be admitted in the first
semester of the Degree programme. Subject to the
Departmental Regulations, a student with DABS or
equivalent can be admitted in the third semester of
the Degree programme of the Faculty, provided he/
she has secured a cumulative GPA of 2.8 or above in
the DABS or equivalent examination.
Assessment
1. Subject to General Academic Regulation 00.8 and the
Departmental Regulations, the ratio of continuous
assessment to final examination shall normally be
2:3.
2. In order to sit for final examination, a student should
achieve a minimum of 40% overall CA mark for the
specific course.
Progression from Semester to Semester
General Academic Regulation 00.9 applies.

DIPLOMA IN ACCOUNTING &
BUSINESS STUDIES (DABS)
Entrance Requirements
1. The entrance requirement shall be as specified in

general regulations 10.2.1
2. A pass in CABS will be exempted from some courses
in DABS.
Programme Structure
The programme will extend over a period of six
semesters. Students will take four courses in each
semester. Except the General Education Courses,
all courses of this programmme are core courses
which must be taken and passed for the award of the
certificate. Each core course consists of 3 credits
and each General Education Course consists of 2
credits. The total number of credits for the entire
programme is 68.
Assessment
1. Two pieces of continuous assessment tests for each
semester course
2. The continuous assessment to final examination is in
the 2:3 ratio.
3. There will be a two-hour end of-semester
examination for each course.
Progression from one Level to the next
1. The General Academic Regulations 00.9 will
apply in this case.
Award of the Certificate
1. A student must pass all the courses in three levels
with a minimum GPA of 2.0
2. The Classification of results will be in accordance
with general regulation 10.4
Level 100
Semester 1
DAB111
Business Mathematics and Statistics (3)
DAB112
Basic Accounting (3)
COM021 Communication and Study Skills (3)
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills I(2)
Semester 2
DAB113
Principles of Management (3)
DAB114
Introduction to Marketing (3)
COM022 Communication and Study Skills II (3)
ICT022
Computing and Information Skills II (2)
Level 200
Semester 3
DAB211
Intermediate Accounting (3)
DAB212 Microeconomics (3)
DAB213 General Psychology (3)
DAB214 Business Statistics (3)
Semester 4
DAB215 Macroeconomics (3)
DAB216 Business Finance (3)
DAB217 Business Law (3)
DAB218 Taxation (3)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
DAB311
Quantitative Methods for Business (3)
DAB312 Financial Management (3)
DAB313 Cost Accounting (3)
DAB314 Management Information Systems
Semester 6
A – Accounting Stream
DAB315 Financial Accounting (3)
DAB316 Management Accounting (3)
DAB317 Auditing (3)
DAB318 Financial Institutions & Markets (3)

29

B – Management Stream
DAB319 Human Resource Management (3)
DAB320 Organisational Design and Development (3)
DAB321 Small Business Management (3)
DAB322 Fundamentals of Materials Management (3)
C – Marketing Stream
DAB323 Sales Management (3)
DAB324 Consumer Behaviour (3)
DAB325 Marketing Management (3)
DAB326 Purchasing Management (3)
NOTE: 1.
		

The students will choose one of the above
streams A or B or C in the 6th Semester at
DABS Level 300

DEPARTMENT OF
ACCOUNTING & FINANCE
BACHELOR OF ACCOUNTANCY
DEGREE PROGRAMME
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
BIS 100
Introduction to Information Systems (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
		
Sciences I (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
COM122 Professional Communication Business (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
		
Sciences II (3, pre-req. STA101)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting (3,
		
pre-req. ACC100)
FIN200
Business Finance (3,pre-req. ACC100)
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3, pre-req.
ECO111)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
MGT203 Quantitative Methods (3, pre-req. STA101 /
MGT 101)
Semester 4
Core Courses
ACC202 Ethics in Accounting (3, pre-req. ACC100)
ACC206 Financial Accounting for Manufacturing
& Alternative Entities (3, pre-req. ACC100)
BIS205
Information Technology (3, pre-req.
BIS100)
Option (3)
Elective (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose any one of the following;
ACC204 Government Accounting (3, pre-req.
ACC100)
ACC205 Special Topics in Accounting (3, pre-req.
ACC100)

Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
ACC309 Principles of Auditing (3, Pre-req. ACC206)
ACC308 Cost & Management Accounting
		
(3, pre-req. ACC201)
ACC311
Introduction to Company Accounts
		
(3, pre-req. ACC 206)
LAW351 Introduction to Company Law (4)
MGT301 Organisational Behaviour
		
(3, pre-req. MGT200)
Semester 6
Core Courses
FIN 300
Financial Management (3, pre-req.FIN200)
ACC305 Taxation Principles (3, pre-req. ACC311)
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems (3, prereq. ACC206, BIS 205)
MGT302 Business Research Methods (3, pre-req.
MGT203
Option (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose any one of the following
ACC310
Auditing Application (3, pre-req. ACC309)
FIN301
Financial Institutions and Markets (3, prereq. FIN200)
FIN304
Principles of Risk Management and
Insurance)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
ACC410
Financial Reporting (3, pre-req. ACC311)
ACC404 Taxation Applications (3, pre-req. ACC305)
ACC443 Industrial Attachment (3)
MGT400 Strategic Management (3, pre-req MGT301)
Elective (3)
Semester 8
Core Courses
ACC409 Management Accounting (3, pre-req.
ACC308)
ACC411
Accounting for Groups (3, pre-req. ACC410
ACC408 Current Issues in Accounting (3, pre-req.
ACC410
ACC444 Research Project (4, pre-req. MGT302)
		
Option (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
ACC405
Accounting Theory (3, pre-req. ACC206)
FIN405
Seminars in Finance (2, pre-req. FIN200)

BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE
(ECONOMICS & ACCOUNTING
REVISED)

(Courses offered through the Department of Accounting
and Finance)
Level 100
Semester 2
Core Course
ACC100 Introduction to Accounting (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting
		
(3, pre-reg..ACC 100)
FIN200
Business Finance (3, pre-reg.ACC 100)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3

Semester 4
Core Courses
ACC202 Ethics in Accounting (3, pre-reg.ACC 100)
ACC206 Financial Accounting for Manufacturing
and Alternative Entities (3, pre-reg.ACC 100)
BIS205
Information Technology (3, pre-req.ICT122)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
ACC308 Cost & Management Accounting
		
(3, pre-req. ACC 201)
ACC309 Principles of Auditing I (3, pre-req. ACC 206)
ACC311
Introduction to Company Account
		
(3, pre-req. ACC 206)
Semester 6
Core Courses
ACC305 Taxation Principles (3, pre-req. ACC 311)
ACC310
Auditing Applications (3, pre-req. ACC309)
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems
		
(3, pre-req. BIS205, ACC206)
Level 400
Semester 7
ACC404 Taxation Applications (3, pre- req. ACC 305)
ACC410
Financial Reporting (3, pre- req. ACC 311)
Semester 8
Core Courses
ACC409 Management Accounting IV (3, pre-req.
ACC 308)
ACC411
Accounting for Groups (3, pre-req. ACC410)

BACHELOR OF FINANCE DEGREE
PROGRAMME
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
		
Sciences I (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
Semester 2
Core Courses
COM122 Professional Communication (Business)
		
(3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II
		
(2, pre-req. ICT 121)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
		
Sciences II (3, pre-req. STA101)
STA114
Business Statistics I (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting
		
(3, pre-req. ACC100)
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics
		
(3, pre-req. ECO 111)
FIN200
Business Finance (3, pre-req. ACC100)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)

30

MGT203
		
		

Quantitative Methods
(3, pre-req. STA101 or MGT 101)
GEC Area 3 (2/3)

Semester 4
Core Courses
ACC206 Financial Accounting for Manufacturing
& Alternative Entities (3, pre-req. ACC100)
ACC202 Ethics in Accounting (3, pre-req ACC100)
BIS205
Information Technology
		
(3, pre-req.ICT122)
ECO212
Intermediate Macroeconomics (3, pre-req.
ECO 112)
MGT200 Organisational Design and Development
(3, pre-req. MGT100)
		
GEC
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
ACC311
Introduction to Company Accounts (3,
pre-req. ACC 206)
ACC308 Cost & Management Accounting
		
(3, pre-req. ACC201)
FIN301
Financial Institutions and Markets I (3,
pre-req. FIN200)
MGT301 Organisational Behaviour (3, pre-req.
MGT200)
Elective (3)
GEC
Semester 6
Core Courses
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems
		
(3, pre-req. ACC100)
FIN300
Financial Management (3, pre-req. FIN200)
FIN302
Financial Planning and Forecasting
		
(3, pre-req. FIN200)
FIN303
Financial Statement Analysis I (3, pre-req.
FIN200&ACC 311)
MGT302 Business Research Methods 		
(3, pre-req. MGT 203)
GEC
Elective/Option (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
FIN304
Principles of Risk Management
		
and Insurance
ACC305 Taxation Principles (3, pre-req. ACC311)
ACC310
Auditing Applications
ACC405 Accounting Theory (3, pre-req. ACC206)
ACC409 Management Accounting
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
ACC410
Financial Reporting (3, pre-req. ACC311)
FIN402
International Business Finance (3, prereq. FIN 301)
FIN400
Financial Theory and Analysis (3, pre-req.
FIN300)
FIN443
Industrial Attachment (3)
MGT400 Strategic Management (3, pre-req. MGT301)
GEC
Elective/Option (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
FIN305
Principles of Real Estate Finance (3)
ACC309 Principles of Auditing (3, Pre-req.ACC206)
ACC404 Taxation Applications (3, pre-req. ACC305)

Semester 8
Core Courses
FIN401
Financial Statement Analysis II
		
(3, pre-req. FIN303)
FIN403
Financial Institutions and Markets II
		
(3, pre-req. FIN301)
FIN404
Investment Analysis and Portfolio
		
Management (3, pre-req. FIN300)
FIN405
Seminars in Finance (2)
FIN444
Research Project (4, pre-req. MGT 302)
		
GEC

BACHELOR OF
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
(BUSINESS INFORMATION
SYSTEMS) DEGREE
PROGRAMME

Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
BIS308
Marketing Information Systems
		
(3, pre-req. MKT100)
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems
		
(3, pre-req. ACC100)
BIS310
Electronic Business (3, pre-req. BIS100
Semester 6
Core Courses
BIS344
Business Web Application Development I
(3, pre-reg. ISS211)
ISS324
Information Systems Design &
		
Implementation (3, pre-reg. ISS323)
IS3S32
Systems Administration
		
(3, pre-reg. ISS331)
ISS334
Information Systems Security
		
(3, pre-reg. ISS331)
Elective (3)

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
ISS101
Information Systems Foundation I (3)
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
		
Sciences I (3)

Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
BIS401
Business Enterprise Information
		
Systems(3, pre-req. ISS324)
ISS443
Information Systems Research
		
(3, pre-reg. ISTA114)
ISS441
Information Systems Project
		
Management (3, pre-reg. ISS324)
ISS302
Industrial Attachment (3, pre-reg. ISS202
or ISS211)
Option/Elective (3)

Semester 2
Core Courses
ISS102
Information Systems Foundation II (3,
pre-req. ISS101)
ISS112
Introduction to Programming (3)
COM122 Professional Communication (Business) (3)
ACC100 Introduction to Accounting (3)
STA102 Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences II (3, pre-req. STA101)
STA114 Business Statistics I (3)

Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
BIS417
Information Systems Auditing (3) (pre req
ACC100)
BIS414
Business Web Applications II (3) (pre req
BIS344)
BIS400
Business Enterprise Information 		
Systems (3) (pre req ISS323 or iss212)
BIS411
Advanced Business Programming (3)

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ISS211
Intermediate Programming
		
(3, pre-req. ISS112)
ISS221
Data & Information Management I (3)
LAW 251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
MGT203 Quantitative Methods (3, pre-req. STA102)
FIN200
Business Finance (3, pre-req. ACC100)
Semester 4
Core Courses
ISS202
Information Technology Tools and
		
Productivity (3, pre-req. ISS211)
ISS212
Advanced Programming
		
(3, pre-req. ISS211)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
BIS210
Introduction to Systems Architecture 3,
pre-req. ISS102)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
ISS321
Data & Information Management II (3)
ISS323
Information Systems Analysis (3)
ISS331
Network Management (3)
BIS302
Decision Support Systems I (3,
		
pre-req. ISS102 or BIS 100)
Option / GEC

Semester 8
Core Courses
ISS446
Strategic Information Systems
		
Management (3, pre req ISS102)
ISS402
Business Systems Project (3, pre req
ISS212,ISS321,ISS324)
ISS442
Information Systems & Society (3)
Option / Elective (3)
Option / Elective (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
BIS409
Advanced Database Systems
		
(3, pre req ISS321)
BIS415
Information Technology in Forensic
		
Accounting (3, pre req ISS202, ACC100)
BIS418
Business Intelligence & Data Analytics
		
(3, pre req BIS3021)
MGL202 Introduction to Supply Chain
		
Management (3)

DEPARTMENT OF
MANAGEMENT
BACHELOR OF BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION (MANAGEMENT)
DEGREE PROGRAMME

31

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy (3)
BIS100
Introduction to Information (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
MGT101 Introduction to Business Mathematics (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
COM122 COM122 Professional Communication
		
(Business) (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
STA114
Business Statistics I (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting (3, prereq. ACC100)
MGT204 Business Ethics (3)
LAW251 Foundation of Business Law (3)
MGT203 Quantitative Methods for Business (3, prereg. STA101 or MGT 101)
Elective (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
MGT208 Research Methods in Business (3)
MGT207 Management of Quality (3)
MGE204 New Venture Creation (3)
MGT210 Foundations of Leadership (3)
Elective (3)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
MGT300 Human Resource Management (3, pre-req.
MGT 100)
MGT320 Organisational Development and Change
(3, pre-req. MGT100)
LAW351 Introduction to Company Law (4)
MGT301 Organisational Behaviour
		
(3, pre-req. MGT100)
Option (3)
Optional Courses
MGT306 Public Sector Management (3)
MGT304 Industrial Relations (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
MGT321 Corporate Social Responsibility (3)
MGT313 Managing In a global Business
		
Environment (3)
MGT323 Negotiations and Conflict Management(3)
MGT445 Research Proposal (3)
Elective (3)
Levels 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
MGT450 Internship (12)
MGT446 Research Report (3, pre-req. MGT445)
Semester 8
Core Courses
MGT400 Strategic Management (3, pre-req. MGT100)
MGT405 Corporate Governance (3)
MGT418 Management Consulting		
(3, pre-req. MGT100)

Option (3)
Elective (3)
Optional Courses
MGT402 Operations Management (3)
MGE321 Business Risk Management (3)
MGE415 Managing Growing Enterprises (3)

BACHELOR OF BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION (LOGISTICS AND
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT)
DEGREE PROGRAMME
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy (3)
BIS100
Introduction to Information (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
MGT101 Introduction to Business Mathematics (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
COM122 Professional Communication (Business) (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
STA114
Business Statistics I (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting (3)
MGL201 Introduction to Logistics Management (3)
MGL203 Principles of Purchasing`(3)
LAW251 Foundation of Business Law (3)
MGT203 Quantitative Methods for Business 		
(3, pre-req. STA101 or MGT101)
FIN200
Business Finance (3, pre-req. ACC100)
Semester 4
Core Courses
MGL204 Management of Inventory (3, pre-req.
MGT101)
MGL202 Introduction To Supply Chain
		
Management ( 3)
MGT208 Research Methods in Business (3)
Elective (3)
Levels 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
MGL303 Logistics Management
		
(3, pre-req. MGL 201)
MGL301 Reverse Logistics (3, pre-req. MGL 201)
MGT301 Organisational Behaviour
		
(3, pre-req. MGT 100)
MGL305 Warehousing and Cube Utilization (3)
Optional Courses
MGL309 Procurement and Contract
		
Management(3, pre-req. MGL 203)
MGT321 Corporate Social Responsibility (3)
MGT204 Business Ethics (3)
MGT 323 Negotiation and Conflict Management (3)
IDB515
Occupational Health & Safety (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
MGL304 Supply Chain Management (3, pre-req.
MGL202)

MGL306

Transportation Management (3, pre-req.
MGL 201)
International Logistics (3, pre-req. MGL201)
Research Proposal (3)

MGL308
MGL444
Elective (3)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
MGL443 Internship (12)
MGL445 Research Report (3, pre-req.MGL444)
Semester 8
Core Courses
MGL446 Strategic Supply Chain Management
		
(3, pre-req. MGL304)
MGL447 Logistics Systems Management
		
(3, pre-req. MGL303)
2 Options (6)
Elective (3) 		

Optional Courses
MGT418 Management Consulting
		
(3, pre-req. MGT100)
MGT405 Corporate Governance (3, pre-req. MGT100)

BACHELOR OF BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION
(ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND
ENTERPRISE
DEVELOPMENT) DEGREE
PROGRAMME
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
BIS 100
Introduction to Information Systems (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
MGT 101 Introduction to Business Mathematics (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
COM122 Professional Communication
		
(Business) (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
STA114
Business Statistics I (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
MGT202
Small Business Management (3)
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting (3, prereq. ACC100)
MGE212 Fundamentals of Entrepreneurship (3)
MGT204 Business Ethics (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
BIS205
Information Technology (3, pre-req. BIS100)
MGE210 Business Plan Development (3)
MGE204 New Venture Creation (3)
MGT208 Research Methods in Business (3)
Elective (3)

32

Levels 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
LAW351 Introduction to Company Law (4)
MGT300 Human Resource Management (3, pre-req.
MGT 200)
MGE315 New Venture Financing (3)
Option (3)
Elective (3)
Optional Courses:
Semester 5
MGE205 Franchising (3)
MGL203 Principles of Purchasing (3)
MGT304 Industrial Relations (3)
MGT320 Organizational Development and 		
Change (3, pre-req. MGT 100)
Semester 6
Core Courses
MGE314 Family Business Management (3)
MGL304 Supply Chain Management (3, pre-req.
MGL202)
MGE444 Research Proposal (3)
Option (3)
Elective (3)
Optional Courses
MGT405 Corporate Governance
(3, pre-req. MGT100)
MGE415 Managing Growing Enterprises (3)
MGL306 Transportation Management (3)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
MGT400 Strategic Management
(3, pre-req. MGT100)
MGT418 Management Consulting
(3, pre-req. MGT 100)
MGE414 Innovation and Entrepreneurship (3)
MGE416 Business Project Incubation Plan
(3, pre-req.MGE444)
MGE445 Research Report (3, pre-req. MGE444)
Semester 8
Core Courses
MGE450 Business Incubation and Implementation
(12, pre-req. MGE416)
MGE451 Business Incubation Report 		
(3, pre-req. MGE 416)

DEPARTMENT OF MARKETING
BACHELOR OF BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION
(MARKETING)DEGREE
PROGRAMME
Course Requirements
MKT100 is a prerequisite for all MKT courses.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills
		
Fundamentals 1 (2)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)

ECO111
STA101
		
STA116

Basic Microeconomics (3)
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences I (3)
Introduction to Statistics (4)

Semester 2
COM122 Professional Communication (Business) (3)
ICT122
Computing and Information Skills
		
Fundamentals II (2, pre-req. ICT121)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
		
Sciences II (3, pre-req. STA101)
Level 200
Semester 3
MKT202 Distribution Management (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting
		
(3, pre-req. ACC 100)
FIN200
Business Finance (3, pre-req. ACC 100)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
Semester 4
MKT204 Integrated Marketing Communication
Strategy (3)
MKT201 Consumer Behaviour Theory and Practice (3)
STA114
Business Statistics I (3)
Elective (3)
Option (3)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
MGT300 Human Resource Management
(3, pre-req. MGT200)
MKT300 International Marketing (3)
Options (6)
GEC / Elective (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
MKT310 Marketing Research Methods (3)
MKT315 Pricing Strategy (3)
Option (6)
GEC / Elective (3)
Level 400
Semester 7
MKT443 Industrial Attachment (3)
MKT409 Brand Management (3)
Options (6)
GEC/ /Elective (3)
Semester 8
MKT444 Research Project (4, pre-req. MKT 310)
MKT410 Marketing Management and Strategy (3)
MGT303 Entrepreneurship and New Business
Development (3, pre-req. MGT202)
Options (6)
GEC/Elective (3)
Optional Courses
Students can take any of the under-listed optional
courses at levels 2, 3 or 4. The number of optional courses
offered shall depend on availability of staff.
MGL203
BIS205
MGT200
MGT203

Principles of Purchasing (3)
Information Technology (3, pre-req. BIS100)
Organizational Design & Development (3,
MGT100)
Quantitative Methods for Business (3, pre-

ECO211
MKT303
MKT304
MKT309
MKT311
		
MKT312
MKT313
MKT314
MKT406
MKT408
MKT411
MKT412
MKT413
MKT414
MKT 415

req. STA 101 or MGT101)
Intermediate Microeconomics For Business
(3, pre-req. ECO111)
Strategic Sales Management (3)
Advertising Management (3, pre-reqMKT204)
Internet Marketing (3)
Strategic Retail Management
(3 pre-req. MKT 202)
Public Relations Strategy (3 pre-req.
MKT 204)
Services Marketing Theory and Practice (3)
Business to Business Marketing Practice(3)
Marketing Ethics (3)
Contemporary Issues in Marketing (3)
Global Business Strategy (3)
Managing Marketing Relationships (3)
Applied Marketing Research (3, pre-req. MKT
310)
Social Marketing (3)
Tourism and Hospitality Marketing

BACHELOR OF BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION
(INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS)
DEGREE PROGRAMME
Course Requirements
MKT 100 and INT 200 are prerequisites for all MKT and
INT courses respectfully.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
BIS100
Introduction to Business Information
Systems (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences I (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
Semester 2
COM122 Professional Communication (Business) (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
Option (3)
Optional Courses
Students to choose one of the following;
BIS205
Information Technology (3, pre-req.ICT122)
MGL202 Introduction To Supply Chain Management
(3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
INT200
Introduction to International Business (3)
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting (3, pre-req.
ACC100)
FIN200
Business Finance (3, pre-req.ACC100)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
MGT203 Quantitative Methods (3, pre-req STA101 or
MGT101)
Semester 4
Core Courses
INT201
International Business Environment (3)

33

MKT201

Consumer Behaviour Theory and Practice
(3)
MKT204 Integrated Marketing Communication
Strategy (3)
MKT310 Marketing Research Methods (3)
		
Option (3)
Optional courses 		
INT300
Export-Import Marketing (3, pre-req. INT200)
INT301
International Trade Institutions (3, pre-req.
INT200)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
MKT300 International Marketing (3)
FIN 402
International Business Finance (3)
MGT300 Human Resources Management (3)
		
Prerequisite MGT 200)
*A Foreign Language (3)
Elective (3) / Option (3)
Optional courses
INT302
Costing and Pricing for Export (3)
MKT309 Internet Marketing (3)
MKT202 Distribution Management (3)
Foreign Language courses
FRE217
CHN101

French for Special Purposes I
Basic Mandarin I

Semester 6
Core Courses
MGT303 Entrepreneurship & New Business
		
Management (3)
LAW252 Specific Business Transactions (3)
INT442
Research Proposal (3)
*A Foreign Language (3)
Option (3)

FOREIGN LANGUAGE COURSES
FRE 227
CHN101

French for Special Purposes II
Basic Mandarin I

Optional courses
INT303
Export administration, Transport and
Logistics (3, pre-req. INT200)
INT403
Globalization and Business (3)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
INT443
Industrial Attachment (12)
INT444
Research Report (3, pre-req. INT442)
Semester 8
MKT411
Global Business Strategy (3)
INT402
Cross-Cultural Business Marketing (3)
INT400
Export and Investment Promotion (3)
Option (3)
Elective (3)
Optional courses (As available)
HIS445
Globalisation & Third World Economies in
Africa, L. America & S. E. Asia (3)
INT401
Cross-Cultural Marketing Research (3)
ECO421
International Trade (3, pre-req. ECO211
and 212)
INT404
Contemporary Issues in International
Business (3)
MKT406 Marketing Ethics (3)

MKT415
MKT409

Tourism and Hospitality Marketing (3)
Brand Management (3)

DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM &
HOSPITALITY
MANAGEMENT
BACHELOR OF
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
(TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
MANAGEMENT) DEGREE
PROGRAMME
2. Regulations
2.1.1 Entrance Qualifications
2.1.2 Normal Entry Scheme
Admission shall be as stipulated in the General Academic
Regulation 20.2 for Bachelor’s Degree Programmes,
with the specific requirement of a grade C (60%) in
English and Mathematics.
2.1.3 Mature Age Entry Scheme
Admission shall be as stipulated in the General Academic
Regulation 00.52.
2.1.4 Articulation
The new articulation policy as may be approved by
Senate will apply.
2.2 Assessment
2.2.1 Assessment will be as stipulated in General
Academic Regulation 00.8.
2.2.2 There will be variations in the mode of assessment
in order to allow for more flexibility. In practicalbased courses, continuous assessment shall have a
higher weighting than the final examination.
2.3 A student shall undergo 6 months of supervised
Industrial Training: January -June (6 months)
semester 6 of Level 300.		
2.3.1 Industrial Training course code shall be as
follows:
THM344: Industrial Training 		
(6 months, 15 credits, core course)
During the course of Industrial Training, students shall be
subjected to such codes, procedures, laws, rules, and
other regulations as applicable to the industry.
Subject to the Regulations Governing Admissions, Fees,
and Discipline Regulation 4.0, and Regulation 6.2.5
above, a student who receives a final warning for
misconduct during the course of Industrial Training shall
be subjected to Discipline Regulations.
During the course of the Industrial Training period,
each student shall be visited twice at the location of
placement to be assessed.
A student’s performance will be assessed by means of A
visit by University of Botswana Supervisor
Industrial Training report and logbook submitted by the
student at the end of the Industrial training period, and
Oral Presentation.

THM344: Industrial Training shall be evaluated as
specified in Regulation 2.3.5. The ratio of Continuous
Assessment to Industrial Training Report to Oral
Presentation shall be 1:2:1.
Programme Structure
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
COM121 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
THM101 Principles of Tourism (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics I (4)
BIS100
Introduction to Information Systems (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
COM122 COM122 Professional Communication
		
(Business) (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
THM104 Fundamentals of the Hospitality Industry
(3, pre-req. THM101)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
Elective (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
THM210 Housekeeping Operations (3 pre-req. THM
104)
THM202 Tour Operations Management (3, pre-req.
THM 101)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
THM206 Food and Beverage Operations 1 (3, pre-req.
THM 104)
THM215 Tourism in Botswana (3, pre-req. THM 101)
Option/Elective (3)
Optional Courses
FRE217
French Language (i) (3)
CHN101 Basic Mandarin (6)
PHR420 Leisure and Youth
MGT200 Organisational Design and
		
Development (3)
ENH322 Food Technology and hygiene (3)
FCS306
Food service management (3)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (3)
MKT313 Services Marketing Theory and Practice (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
THM208 Food and Beverage Operations II (3, pre-req.
THM 206)
THM307 Front Office Operations (3, pre-req. THM 104)
BIS205
Information Technology (3, pre-req. BIS 100)
THM304 Event and Conference Management (3, prereq. THM 101)
Option/Elective (3)
GEC
Optional courses
PHR312 Leisure and Tourism Development(3)
ENH323 Occupational Health, Safety and Hygiene
(3)
PHR141 Recreation and Leisure (3)
FCS210
Foundations of Food Preparation (3)
FCS211
Introduction to Interior Design (3)
FCS102
Introduction to Nutrition (3)
MKT313 Services Marketing Theory and Practice (3)

34

Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
THM305 Tourism Planning and Policy
		
(3, pre-req. THM 101)
THM310 Tourist Behaviour (3 pre-req. THM 101)
THM403 Food and Beverage Control
		
3 Pre-req. THM104)
THM303 Research Methods (3)
		
Option/Elective (3)
Optional Courses
FRE114
Basic French Language (3)
PHR420 Leisure and Youth (2)
MGT200 Organisational Design and Development
(3)
ENH322 Food Technology and hygiene (3)
FCS206
Fundamentals of Food Science (3)
FCS210
Foundations of Food Preparation (3)
FCS211*
Introduction to Interior Design (3)
FCS306
Food Service Management (3)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
THM 344 Industrial Training (15)

FOOD AND BEVERAGES
MANAGEMENT
SPECIALISATION
Semester 7
Core Courses
THM408 Gastronomy (3) (3 pre-req. THM104,THM208)
THM428 Tourism and Hospitality Sales and
		
Marketing (3, pre-req. MKT100)
THM402 Strategic Tourism and Hospitality
		
Management(3, pre-req. THM101,THM104)
		
Option (3)
Elective (3)
GEC
Optional Courses
THM421 Safari & Camp Management (3)
THM404 Contemporary Cuisine
		
(3 pre-req. THM 104 THM208)
THM409 Food Safety (3 pre-req. THM 104)
Semester 8
Core Courses
THM415 Corporate Social Responsibility in
		
Hospitality and Tourism (3)
THM424 Food and Beverage Management
		
(3, pre-req. THM 208)
THM444 Research Project (4, pre-req. THM 303)
THM418 Fast Food Operation and Management
		
(3 pre-req. THM 104 THM208)
		
Elective (3)

ROOMS MANAGEMENT
SPECIALISATION
Semester 7
Core Courses
THM312 Hotel Sales and Guest Relations (3)
THM428 Tourism and Hospitality Sales and
		
Marketing (3, pre-req. MKT100)
THM402 Strategic Tourism and Hospitality
		
Management(3, pre-req.THM101,THM104)
Option (3)

GEC
Elective (3)

THM411
ENS402

Optional Courses
THM421 Safari & Camp Management (3)
THM412 Front Office Management
		
(3 pre-req. THM 307)
THM413 Housekeeping Management (3 pre-req.
THM 210)
THM414 Loss Prevention Management (3)
Semester 8
Core Courses
THM415 Corporate Social Responsibility in
		
Hospitality and Tourism (3)
THM416 Hospitality Management
		
(3 pre-req. THM 104)
THM419 Hospitality Facilities Planning and Design
(3) pre-req. THM104)
THM444 Research Project (4, pre-req. THM 303)
Elective (3)

Management of National Parks, Reserves
and Sanctuaries (3)
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (3)
Safari & Camp Management (3)
Pro-poor Tourism (3, pre-req. THM 101)

THM421
THM422
Semester 8
Core Courses
THM415 Corporate Social Responsibility in
		
Hospitality and Tourism (3)
THM429 Sustainable Nature-Based Tourism
		
(3 pre-req. THM 101)
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (3)
THM444 Research Project (4, pre-req. THM 303)
Elective (3)

TOURISM MANAGEMENT
SPECIALISATION
Semester 7
Core Courses
THM421 Safari & Camp Management (3)
THM428 Tourism and Hospitality Sales and 		
Marketing (3, pre-req. MKT100)
THM402 Strategic Tourism and Hospitality
		
Management (3)
Option (3)
Elective (3)
GEC
Optional Courses
THM420 Tourism in Southern Africa: Cases and
Issues (3 pre-req. THM 405)
THM308 International Tourism (3, pre-req. THM101)
Semester 8
Core Courses
ENS468
Tourism and Development (3 pre-req.
THM101)
THM415 Corporate Social Responsibility in
		
Hospitality and Tourism (3)
THM427 Contemporary Issues in Tourism
		
(3 pre-req. THM 101)
THM407 Destination Management
		
(3 pre-req. THM 101)
THM444 Research Project (4, pre-req. THM 303)
		

CULTURAL AND NATURE-BASED
TOURISM SPECIALISATION
Semester 7
Core Courses
THM410 Cultural Tourism (3, pre-req. THM 101)
THM428 Tourism and Hospitality Sales and 		
Marketing (3, pre-req. MKT100)
THM330 Community-Based Tourism		
(3 pre-req.THM 101)
Option (3)
GEC
Elective (3)
Optional Courses
THM400 Tour Guiding (3)

35

FACULTY OF EDUCATION

DEAN
Professor Lily Mafela
BEd (UBS) MEd (Bristol,UK) MA
(NorthWestern) USA, MBA (DeMontfort) PhD
(Northwestern) USA

DEPUTY DEAN
Professor T. L. Maruatona
BA (University of Botswana), MSc (Wisconsin),
)Phd (Georgia

FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR
Mr G. F. Gaogane
BAcc (University of Botswana), PGDAcc, MSc

LIFELONG LEARNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

)(Birmingham

EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATIONS
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY
FAMILY AND CONSUMER SCIENCES

ACTING TEACHING PRACTICE

LANGUAGES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES EDUCATION

COORDINATOR

MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE

Dr R. S. Masene

EDUCATION
SPORTS SCIENCE
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER

PRIMARY EDUCATION

M.Tshebo
BASS,MSc HRM,University of Salford(

36

The following Departments are housed in the
Faculty of Education:

DEPARTMENT OF LIFELONG
LEARNING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT
Department of Lifelong Learning and Community
Development is a leading center of academic excellence
in the fields of Lifelong Learning and Community
Development. It offers diverse training courses and
educational services, including though not limited
to public education, working class education, adult
literacy, non-formal education, extension training
and recognition of forms of learning other than the
formal, just to mention a few. It caters for people in
all circumstances, for example, formal education, outof-school or non-formal education for children, youth
and adults. It offers five (5) academic programs, Diploma
in Lifelong Learning and Community Development
(Full-time & Distance Learning), Bachelor’s Degree in
Lifelong Learning and Community Development (Fulltime), Masters in Lifelong Learning and Community
Development, M/Phil/PhD in Lifelong Learning and
Community Development (Full-time or Part-time
Learning) and Diploma in NGO Management (Distance
Learning). Numerous and relevant short courses tailormade for specific needs are also offered like the Basic
Extension Skills Training (BEST).
Department of Educational Foundations
The Department of Educational Foundations offers
courses in General Methods, Psychology, Philosophy,
History and Sociology of Education, Educational Research
and Evaluation, and Planning and Administration in
selected career areas such as Teacher Education. The
Department also provides training in Counseling, Gender
Education, Curriculum and Instruction and Special
Education, and the education component of the Design
and Technology Education Program. The programmes of
study are: Bachelor of Education in Special Education,
Bachelor of Education in Counseling, Post Graduate
Diploma in Education and Master’s and Doctoral
Programmes in Counseling and Human Services,
Curriculum and Instruction, Educational Management,
Gender Education, and Research and Evaluation.
Department of Educational Technology
The Department of Educational Technology provides
guidance and assistance in the design and implementation
of teaching methods and materials, and offers courses in
the use and development of educational resources for
other departments of the Faculty of Education.
Department of Family and Consumer Sciences
The Department of Family and Consumer Sciences is
responsible for the training of Family and Consumer
Sciences specialists to teach in the formal education
system, as well as to serve in extension and other nonformal education programmes. The programme of study
is the Bachelor of Education in Family and Consumer
Sciences. . The department is also offering Bachelor
of Education in Early Childhood Development and
Education which is housed in the Department of Primary
Education.
Department of Languages and Social Sciences Education
The Department of Languages and Social Sciences
Education offers undergraduate, postgraduate diploma
and graduate level courses in the areas of Languages
and Social Sciences Education. There are two graduate
programmes: M. Ed (Religious Education) and M. Ed

(Social Studies). Plans are underway to introduce M. Ed
(Moral Education), M. Phil/PhD (Social Studies), M.Ed.
(Language Education and MEd Environmental Education.
Department of Mathematics and Science Education
The Department of Mathematics and Science Education
provides programmes in computer studies, mathematics
and science. It offers a wide range of courses including:
The theory and practice of teaching school computer
studies, mathematics and science education; curriculum
development, research and evaluation; contemporary
issues in computer, mathematics and science; issues
in computer, mathematics and science pedagogical
content knowledge; the impact of ICT on teachinglearning processes; and the philosophy and psychology
of computer, mathematics and science teaching. The
programmes of study are the Bachelor of Education
(Science), Bachelor of Education in Computer Science
Education ,Master of Education, MPhil, and
PhD. The department offers service courses for Bachelor
of Education (Secondary) and Post Graduate Diploma
in Education (PGDE). Also the department has an inservice unit that provides workshops and seminars to
school teachers and supports schools to strengthen
the structure of computer, mathematics and science
departments in these schools.
Department of Sport Science
The aim of the Department of Sport Science is to provide
high quality academic and professional programmes
in Exercise Science & Wellness, Recreation & Sport
Management, Physical Education & Coaching and
Sport & Exercise Psychology and Sport Studies with
broad applications in various career settings such as
coaching, teaching, administration, rehabilitation, health
and fitness, recreation, parks, marketing and academic
research. The undergraduate programme of study is the
Bachelor of Education in Sports science.. Department of
Primary Education
The Department of Primary Education provides inservice programmes to upgrade the skills of primary and
secondary teacher educators, such as teacher training
college tutors, education officers, members of the school
management teams and teachers. The Department
offers a Bachelor of Education (Primary) a Bachelor of
Education Art and Design, Bachelor of Education Music
Education, Bachelor of Education Early Childhood
Education and a Bachelor of Education (Leadership &
Management) Degrees.
10.0 Faculty Regulations
All programmes in the Faculty shall be governed by the
University General Academic Regulations. Any other
relevant information pertaining to the programmes shall
be as stipulated under the appropriate department in the
following pages.
10.20 Teaching Practice/Practicum
All pre-service students enrolled in a Bachelor of
Education Programme shall undergo teaching practice
as specified in the Faculty Teaching Practice/Practicum
Regulations, obtainable from the Teaching Practice office
and Faculty website.
10.30 Entrance Requirements
The University General Regulations shall apply.
10.40 Assessment
For courses taught by the Faculty of Education,
continuous assessment shall comprise a minimum of
2 components of work per course per semester. Each
course shall be examined by an associated paper of
duration between 1 to 3 hours. Some courses will be
assessed by continuous assessment only, depending

37

on the nature of the course. The ratio of continuous
assessment to formal examination shall be 1:1. For
courses taken in other Faculties, the ratio of continuous
assessment to examination results shall be as determined
by the Faculties concerned.
10.50 Progression
The University General Academic Regulations shall apply.
10.60 Award of Degree
The University General Academic Regulations shall apply.

DIPLOMA IN LIFELONG LEARNING
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
1.0 Departmental Special Regulations for the Diploma in
Lifelong Learning and community Development
2.0 Subject to the provisions of General Regulations 000
and 100, the following Special Regulations shall apply:
1.1 Entrance Requirements
The normal entrance requirements shall be as follows:
a) For Level 100, a minimum of 3 credits in the BGCSE
or its equivalent or requirements as specified in General
Regulation 10.21, with preference given to those with
some experience in Adult Education.
b) For Level 200, a Certificate in Adult Education or its
equivalent in a related field.
1.2 Programme Structure
1.2.1 The Programme shall extend over two full
academic years.
1.2.2 Course Listings
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
LCD 100 Principles of Lifelong learning and 		
Community Development.
LCD 101 Psychology & Theories of adult Learning
LCD 102 Programming in adult learning and
Education
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 105 Basic Tender and Contracting Skills in
Community Development
LCD 103 Sociological issues in community 		
development and lifelong learning
LCD214
Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
LCD 216 Lifelong learning and special groups
General Education courses
Two 2-credit GECs are to be taken from the
university wide menu:
COM161 Communication and Academic literacy
Skills (3)
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals 1 (2)
Semester 2
Core Courses
LCD 104 Basic experiential learning in community
development organizations
LCD 106 Community Self-help projects
LCD 210 Psychology and generational teaching in
adult learning

Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 200 Basic foundational issues in adult learning
and education
LCD 201 Psychological theories in adult learning and
education
LCD 213 Community development through adult
basic education and training
LCD 214 Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
LCD217
Lifelong learning in the 21st Century
General Education Courses
Two 2-credit GECs are to be taken from the universitywide menu:
COM162
ICT122

Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education)
Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals II (2)

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
LCD 211 Introduction to Community 		
Entrepreneurship
LCD202
Design and development of adult learning
and education programmes
LCD 203 Teaching approaches in non-formal, formal
and informal learning
LCD207
Theoretical and practical approaches to
planning and managing community projects
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 209 Principles and skills for Integrated projects
LCD 213 Community development through adult
basic education and training
LCD 214 Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
LCD 216 Lifelong Learning and special groups
Semester 4
Core Courses
LCD 204 Gender issues in lifelong learning and
community development
LCD 205 Basic issues in workplace learning
LCD 206 Supervision in community development
LCD 208 Strategies for promoting rural development
LCD 212 Issues and trends in Participatory 		
development methods
Electives
One 3-credit elective, to be chosen from any course
outside the Department of Adult Education, for which
students are eligible, is required (except for new
entrants).
General Education Courses
For new entrants two GEC courses are to be taken from
the university wide menu. These should be COM161
which is a 3 credit course and ICT which is a 2 credit
course.
Optional
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 213 Community development through adult
basic education and training
LCD 214 Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
LCD 215 Computers in adult learning and education
LCD 217 Lifelong learning in the 21st Century
1.3 Assessment

1.3.1 The performance of each student shall be assessed
at the end of each semester with a 2-hour examination
unless otherwise stated in the course outline.
1.3.2 The ratio between continuous assessment and
formal exam shall be 1:1.
1.3.3 Continuous assessment for Adult Education
courses shall be based on extended assignments and
tests as well as other forms of assessment, such as
periodic tests, projects and presentations.

LCD 103

1.4 Award of Diploma
The award of the diploma shall be in accordance with
General Academic Regulations 00.85

SEMESTER 2
Core
COM 162 Communication and Study skills II
ICT 122
Computing and information skills II
LCD 105 Basic tender and contracting skills in
community development
LCD 220 Strategies for building NGOs’ capacity for
community development

1.5 Progression to the Bachelor of Education
Programme (Adult Education)
A student who successfully completes Levels 100 and
200 of the Diploma Programme may be admitted
directly into Level 300 of the Degree Programme.

DIPLOMA IN NGO MANAGEMENT
Subject to the provisions of Academic General
Regulations 000 and General Regulations for Diploma
and Certificate Programmes 10.1, 10.21a, 10.21b, 10.22,
10.23, & 10.24, the following Special Regulations shall
apply.
4.2 Entrance Requirements
The normal entrance requirements shall be as follows:
a) For Level 100, a minimum of 3 credits in the
Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education
(BGCSE) or its equivalent or requirements as specified
in General Regulation 10.21, with preference given to
those with some experience in NGO work settings.
b) For direct entry into Level 200, candidate must have
obtained a Credit in Certificate in Adult Education or
its equivalent in a related field and other NGO work
settings.
c) A Pass in Certificate in Adult Education and in a
related field will be considered if candidate has work
experience in NGO work settings for a minimum of
three years after earning the Certificate.
d) All students who gain admission with a Certificate in
Adult Education or its equivalent in a related field and
other NGO work settings will be exempted from doing
specific courses.
e) Candidates will be considered for mature age entry
based on general academic regulation 00.52 of the
University of Botswana.
Programme Structure
It uses the same basic structure as the Diploma in
Adult Education programme that currently exists in the
Department. The programme shall extend over eight
semesters. The normal workload shall be in accordance
with general regulation 00.312 for a part-time
undergraduate student.
Course listing Level 100
Core courses

LCD 106
Optional
LCD 101
LCD 102

Optional
LCD 206
LCD 217

Sociological issues in community 		
development and lifelong learning
Community Self-help projects

Psychology & Theories of adult learning
Programming in adult learning and
education

Supervising Community Education 		
Programmes
Lifelong Learning in the 21st century

SEMESTER 3
Core
LCD 202 Programme planning, implementation &
evaluation in Adult Education
LCD 207 Theoretical and practical approaches to
planning and management community
projects
LCD 208 Strategies for promoting rural development
LCD 209 Principles and skills for Integrated projects
Optional
LCD 205
LCD 217

Basic issues in workplace learning
Lifelong Learning in the 21st century

SEMESTER 4
Core
LCD 221 Mobilizing and managing funds in the NGO
context
LCD 224 NGOs and community development needs
LCD 225 NGOs and community health
LCD 226 Trade Unions and NGOs
Optional
LCD 211
LCD218

Introduction to community 		
entrepreneurship
Policy in NGO contexts

* These are courses to be taken only by students in the
Diploma in NGO Management course.

BACHELOR DEGREE IN LIFELONG
LEARNING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT
2.0 Departmental Special Regulations for the Bachelor
of Education Degree in Adult Education

Level 100 (Semester One)
GEC COURSES:
COM 162 Communication and Study skills II
ICT 122
Computing and information skills II
CORE COURSES – LEVEL ONE
SEMESTER 1
Core
LCD100
Principles OF Lifelong learning and 		
Community Dev.

38

Subject to the provision of the General Regulations 000
and 200, the following Special Regulations shall apply:
2.1 Entrance Requirements
The normal entrance qualifications shall be the
following:
a) For Level 100, a minimum of 3 credits in the BGCSE
or its equivalent, with credit in English Language, or

as specified in General Regulations 2.2.2 and 2.2.3.
Preference will be given to those applicants with some
experience in adult education;
b) For Level 200, requirements will be as stipulated in
General Regulation 2.2.4.
c) For Level 300, the requirement is a Diploma or its
equivalent in Adult Education or a related field.

General Education Courses
One 2-credit GEC is to be chosen from the universitywide menu.

2.2 Programme Structure
2.2.1 Level 100 courses shall be as stipulated in
Departmental Special Regulations 1.2.2.
2.2.2 Course Listings

Optional Courses
One optional course from the following:
LCD 209 Principles and skills for Integrated projects
LCD 213 Community development through adult
basic education and training
LCD 214 Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
LCD 216 Lifelong Learning and special groups

Level 100
SEMESTER 1
Core Courses
LCD 100 Principles of Lifelong learning and 		
Community Development.
LCD 101 Psychology & Theories of adult Learning
LCD 102 Programming in adult learning and
Education
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 105 Basic Tender and Contracting Skills in
Community Development
LCD 103 Sociological issues in community 		
development and lifelong learning
LCD214
Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
LCD 216 Lifelong learning and special groups
SEMESTER 2
Core Courses
LCD 104
LCD 106
LCD 210
Optional
LCD 200
LCD 201
LCD 213
LCD 214
LCD217

Basic experiential learning in community
development organizations
Community Self-help projects
Psychology and generational teaching in
adult learning
Basic foundational issues in adult learning
and education
Psychological theories in adult learning and
education
Community development through adult
basic education and training
Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
Lifelong learning in the 21st Century

General Education courses
Two 2-credit GECs are to be taken from the
university wide menu:
COM161 Communication and Academic literacy
Skills (3)
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals 1 (2)
LEVEL 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
LCD 211 Introduction to Community 		
Entrepreneurship
LCD202
Design and development of adult learning
and education programmes
LCD 203 Teaching approaches in non-formal, formal
and informal learning
LCD207
Theoretical and practical approaches to
planning and managing community projects
LCD 312 Monitoring & Evaluation approaches in
community Development

Electives
One 3-credit elective is to be chosen from the
university-wide menu.

Semester 4
Core Courses
LCD 204 Gender issues in lifelong learning and
community development
LCD 205 Basic issues in workplace learning
LCD 206 Supervision in community development
LCD 208 Strategies for promoting rural development
LCD 212 Issues and trends in Participatory 		
development methods
General Education Courses
One 2-credit GEC is to be chosen from the university
wide menu.

Semester 6
Core Courses
LCD304
Practical contexts of community 		
development and lifelong learning
LCD 312 Monitoring & Evaluation approaches in
community Development
LCD 317 Sustainability in Community Development
General Education Courses
One 2-credit GEC is to be chosen from the university
wide menu.
Electives
One 3-credit elective from any course outside the
Department of Adult Education, for which students are
eligible, is required.
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 305 Internationalization of adult and lifelong
learning
LCD 314 Counseling in community development
LCD 420 Adult education priorities in human rights
and democracy
LCD 316 Issues in lifelong learning & community
development
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
LCD 406

Electives
One 3-credit elective from any course outside the
Department of Adult Education, for which students are
eligible, is required.
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 213
LCD 214
LCD 215
LCD 217
LCD314

Community development through adult
basic education and training
Lifelong learning, vocational education and
training
Computers in adult learning and education
Lifelong learning in the 21st Century
Counseling in community development

Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
LCD 300 Organizational management in community
development
LCD 301 Leadership contexts in adult learning
LCD 302 Developing Human Resources for 		
community development
LCD 303 Basic Research Design in lifelong learning
and community development
General Education Courses
One 2-credit GEC is to be chosen from the university
wide menu.
Electives
One 3-credit elective from any course outside the
Department of Adult Education, for which students are
eligible, is required.
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 305 Internationalization of adult and lifelong
learning
LCD 313 Instructional design in lifelong and
community learning
LCD 315 Organizational Development approaches in
community development
LCD316
Issues in lifelong learning & community
development

39

LCD 410
LCD 411
LCD 418

Global perspectives and political economy
of adult education
Research Projects in Lifelong Learning and
Community Development
Theories and practice of training in
community development
Learning Cities

Education Courses
One 2-credit GEC is to be chosen from the universitywide menu.
Electives
One 3-credit elective from any course outside the
Department of Adult Education, for which students are
eligible, is required.
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:
LCD 305 Internationalization of adult and lifelong
learning
LCD 313 Instructional design in lifelong and
community learning
LCD 315 Adult Education & Organizational 		
Development
LCD 316 Issues in lifelong learning & Community
Development
LCD 419 Topics in literacies
Semester 8
Core
LCD 407 Management approaches in community
economic projects
LCD 408 Policy contexts for lifelong learning
LCD 409
Community Development and Social
Exclusion
LCD 422 Entrepreneurship and community economic
projects
General Education Courses
One 2-credit GEC is to be chosen from the universitywide menu.
Electives
One 3-credit elective from any course outside the

Department of Adult Education, for which students are
eligible, is required.
Optional Courses
Students shall choose one of the following:

-Produce knowledgeable and skilful special education
teachers for primary schools.
-Produce teachers who have the skills to teach school
subjects to both disabled and non-disabled persons
Entry Requirements

LCD 314
LCD 420
LCD 421

Counseling in community development
Adult education priorities in human rights
and democracy
Community Development policies

2.3 Assessment
Assessment shall be in accordance with Departmental
Special Regulations 1.3.1 to 3.3.
2.4 Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from one semester to the next shall be in
accordance with General Academic Regulation 00.9

For Level One
A minimum overall aggregate of Second class in the
Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education or
its equivalent, including at least six subjects taken in not
more than two sittings.
Obtain a minimum of grade C in English for candidates
wishing to take a teaching subject in humanities.

EFS101 Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
African Languages
CORE
ALL141
Introduction to African Oral and Written
Literature (3)
ALL122
The Characteristics of Human Language (3)
Plus
COM161
ICT121

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)
Computing and Information Skills I (2)

Plus one course from the following (3):
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
EFP101
Foundations of Developmental 		
Psychology (3)

Obtain a minimum grade of C in mathematics and a
pass in English for candidates wishing to take a teaching
subject in the sciences.

Double major: Special Education and History
CORE (To be taken by All)

Or as specified in General Regulation 20:22.

EFS101:

In-Service Teachers’ Entry Requirements

History
ARC101:
Take ALL:
EFP100:
EFP101:

2.5 Award of the Degree
Award of the Degree shall be in accordance with
General Academic Regulations 00.85

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATIONAL
FOUNDATIONS
Introduction
The Educational Foundations Department provides both
foundational courses as well as offers full-fl edged
programs. The Department is organized into disciplines
as follows:
- Curriculum and Instruction- Educational Management
- Research and Evaluation
- Education Psychology
- Counselling and Human Services
- History and Philosophy of Education Sociology of
Education
- Special Education
- Gender Education
The department houses the following programs:
Diploma Programs
A one year full time pre-service Post Graduate Diploma
in Education
First Degree Programs
A two year in-service/four year pre-service Bachelor of
Education in Special Education Program
A two year in-service/four year pre-service in Bachelor of
Education in Counselling Program
Programs and Courses offered in the Department
Department Regulations

B.Ed. (Special Education)
Double Major)
Aim
The aim of the B.Ed. (Special Education) double major
is to equip students with relevant intellectual and
professional skills for providing specialized services to
exceptional learners in schools and other institutions
such as rehabilitation and resource centres. In more
specific terms the program will
-Raise the awareness level of the student in respect to
the causes, prevention and intervention strategies of the
various forms of impairment.
-Produce knowledgeable and skilful special education
teachers for secondary schools.

Current: Level Two Entry for In-service Candidates
Applicants for the Bachelors in Special Education
would be required to have a Diploma in Education
or its equivalent from any recognised university/
institution. For example, Diploma in Physical Education,
Family and consumer sciences, etc. Preference will be
given to teachers with more than two years teaching
experience in special education. The Diploma referred
to shall normally be of duration of two or more years
and one acceptable to UB. Refer to General Regulation
20.24. Entry on the basis of a Diploma of less than two
years duration may be considered if the applicant has a
previous related Certificate qualification in the Special
Education field, and experience of not less than five
years. Such candidates will start at the 1st year to receive
tuition in some foundation courses in education and in
special education. This would allow them to bridge the
gap due to the endorsement they hold.
Level Two
Graduates from colleges of education who did not major
in Special Education and holders of Diploma in Primary
Education or its equivalent from other recognized
institutions. Candidates in this category will be awarded
6 credits of level one special education courses. They
will however take courses as recommended by the
department to make up for any shortfalls at level one
Level Three
Candidates with Diploma in Special Education from the
University of Botswana or its equivalent qualification
will be admitted in level 3.
Program Structure and Content
All Special Education courses carry three credits unless
otherwise stated. Articulation of B. Ed will be done for
B. Ed Special Education (Primary) in terms of content.
NOTE: Articulation is done for B.Ed Special Education
(Primary) in both content and Special Education.
Articulation for the B.Ed (Special Education) secondary is
only possible in Special Education and not content.
Level 1, Semester 1
Level 1 (17- 19 credits)
Double major: Special Education and African Languages
& Literature
Special Education CORE (To be taken by All)

40

Plus GEC
COM161
ICT121E

Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
Introduction to World Pre-History (3)
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
Foundations of Developmental 		
Psychology (3)
Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)
Computing and Information Skills I (2)

Double major: Special Education and
Environmental Science
CORE (To be taken by All)
EFS101:
ENS101:
ENS141:

Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
Introduction to Env. Science: Physical (3)
Introductory Quantitative Techniques in
Env. Science I (3)
ICT121: Computing and Information Skills I (2)
COM141: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
Plus One of the following courses (3)
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
EFP101
Foundations of Developmental 		
Psychology (3)
Double major: Special Education and Science
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS101:
Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
MAT111: Introductory Mathematics 1 (4)
COM141: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
ICT121E: Computer and Information Skills I (3)
Plus one of the following Courses (4):
BIO111: Principles of Biology (4)
CHE101: General Chemistry 1 (4)
PHY112: Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
Plus one course from the following (3):
EFP100:
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
EFP101:
Foundations of Developmental 		
Psychology (3)
Double Major: Special Education and Theology &
Religious Studies
CORE (To be taken by All)

Special Education
EFS101 Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
Theology & Religious Studies
TRS101 Introduction to Biblical Studies (3)
Optional Courses: Choose one
TRS102: Religion and Science (3)
TRS103: Religions of Botswana (3)
TRS104: Christianity and the Rise of New 		
Religious Movements in Botswana (3)
TRS105: Asian Religions: A survey (3)
TRS106: Ethics: Classical Theories (3)

Pre Service: Plus 2-3 credits of GEC/Elective
Double Major: Special Education and English
First Major: Special Education
CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201
Psychology of exceptional children [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED 		
specialization
EFS220
Braille Reading and Writing with visual
Impairment [3]
EFS230
Communication Process for 		
students with Hearing impairment [3]
EFS240

Plus one course from the following (3 credits):
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
EFP101
Foundations of Developmental 		
Psychology (3)
Plus GEC
COM161:

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)
ICT121E: Computing and Information Skills I (2)
Double Major: Special Education and English
Special Education
CORE (To be taken by All)
EFS101
English
CORE
ENG113
ENG121
Plus
COM161
ICT121E

Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
Introduction to Literature: Prose (3 credits)
Introduction to English Language 		
Description and Usage [3]
Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)
Computing and Information Skills I (2)

Plus one course from the following (3 credits):
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology [3]
EFP101
Foundations of Developmental 		
Psychology (3)
LEVEL 2 Pre- Service
Semester 1 (17-19 credits)
Double Major: Special Education and African Language
and Literature

EFS250

Curriculum and instructional Methods
for Students with Mild to Moderate
Mental Retardation [3]
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with Learning disabilities/		
difficulties (3)

Second Major: English
CORE
Take any Two
ENG211
The Pronunciation of English (3)
ENG212
Introduction to English Literature: The
Novel (3)
ENG213 Prose Literature of Southern Africa (3)
ENG223 The Drama of Southern Africa (3)
Plus
ELL290
Language Education Issues (3)
Plus
Any Elective (2-3 credits)
Double Major: Special Education and Environmental
Science
First Major: Special Education
CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201 Psychology of exceptional children (3 credits)
Plus one course relevant to SPED Specialization
EFS220
Braille Reading and Writing for Students
with visual Impairment [3]
EFS230
Communication Process for students with
Hearing impairment [3]
EFS240
Curriculum and instructional Methods for
Students with Mild to Moderate 		
Mental Retardation [3]
EFS250
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with learning Disabilities/		
difficulties (3 credits)

Methods for Students with Mild to Moderate Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS250:
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with Learning Disabilities/		
difficulties [3]
Plus one second Major from the Following:
A. Mathematics & Science
CORE COURSES (Take All)
ESM261: Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary
School Mathematics [3]
MAT211: Introductory Set and Number Theory [3]
(Pre-requisite: MAT 111)
MAT221: Calculus 1[3] (Pre-requisite: MAT 122)
Plus One of the Following
MAT251: Vectors & Introductory Mechanics[3]
Pre-requisite: Pass MAT 122
MAT271: Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3) Pre-requisite: Pass MAT 122
B. Biology
CORE COURSES (Take All)
ESS261:
Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary
School Science [3]
BIO211:
Cell Biology (3 Credits) (Pre-requisite: Pass
BIO111/112)
BIO 214: Introduction to Mammalian Physiology [3]
(Pre-requisite: Pass BIO111/112
BIO218:
Biology of Flowering Plants (3)
C. Chemistry
ESS261:
Basic Teaching Methods in Sec School
Science (3)
CHE211: Introduction to Analytical Chemistry [2]
(Pre-requisite: CHE 102)
CHE213: Analytical Chemistry Lab [1 credit]
(Pre-requisite: Pass CHE 102)
CHE232: Structure & Survey of Functional Groups 1
[2] (Pre-requisite: CHE 102)
CHE234: Organic Chemistry Laboratory 1 [1]
(Pre-requisite: CHE 102)
MAT291: Engineering Mathematics I [3]
D.Physics
ESS261: Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary
School Science [3]
PHY231:

First Major: Special Education
CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201
Psychology of exceptional children [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS220
Braille Reading and Writing with visual
Impairment [3]
EFS230
Communication Process for 		
students with Hearing impairment [3]
EFS240
Curriculum and instructional Methods
for Students with Mild to Moderate
Mental Retardation [3]
EFS250
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with learning Disabilities/		
difficulties [3]
Second Major: African Languages
CORE (Take All)
ALL221:
Sound Systems in African Languages [3]
ALL241:
History and Structure of the Setswana
Novel [3]
Plus
ELL290
Language Education Issues [3]
Plus GEC/ Elective

Second Major: Environmental Science
PHY232:
CORE COURSES (take all)
ENS242: Introduction to Spatial Analysis [3]
PHY239:
Optional Courses: Choose One from the Following
ENS211: The Earth Environment System [3]
ENS251: The Human Environment System [3]
Plus
ELG290
Theory of Geography teaching [3]
PLUS:
2/3 Credits of GEC/Elective
Double Major: Special Education and Science
First Major: Special Education
CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201:
Psychology of exceptional children [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS220:
Braille Reading and Writing with Visual
Impairment 3]
EFS230:
Communication Process for 		
students with Hearing impairment [3]
EFS240:
Curriculum Instructional

41

MAT291:

Mechanics, Vibrations and Waves, Physical
Optics[3] (pre-requisite Pass PHY112)
Properties of Matter, Basic Thermodynamics
and Introduction to Nuclear Physics (3
credits) (Pre-requisite = PHY112)
Physics Practicals 3.1 (1 credit) Pre-		
requisites Pass PHY112, Co-requisites
PHY231 or 232) (1)
Engineering Mathematics I[3]

Double Major: Special Education and Theology and
Religious Studies
First Major: Special Education
CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201: Psychology of exceptional children [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED Specialization
EFS 220: Braille Reading and Writing with visual
Impairment [3]
EFS230: Communication Process for students with

Hearing impairment [3]
EFS240:
Curriculum and instructional Methods for
Students with Mild to Moderate Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS250:
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with Learning disabilities/		
difficulties [3]
Second Major: Theology and Religious Studies
TRS201
Logic I: Introduction to Logic [3]
Plus Optional course, choose One.
TRS202: Hebrew Bible Narratives [3]
TRS203: African Traditional Religions in Botswana [3]
TRS204: Theologies of Gender [3]
TRS206: Beginning Biblical Greek 1: New 		
Testament Greek [3]
TRS207: Introduction to Christian Theology [3]
TRS208: Hebrew Bible as History and Story [3]
TRS220: Critical Thinking [3]
TRS221: The politics of Gender [3]
TRS222: Religion and Development [3]
Plus
ELM290: Theory of Moral Education [3]
PLUS
Elective courses of 2-3 credits
Double Major: Special Education and History
Special Education CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201:
EFS220:
EFS230:
EFS240:
EFS250:

Psychology of exceptional children [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED 		
Specialization
Braille Reading and Writing with visual
Impairment [3]
Communication Process for 		
students with Hearing impairment [3]
Curriculum and instructional Methods
for Students with Mild to Moderate
Mental Retardation [3]
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with Learning disabilities/		
difficulties [3]

HISTORY
CORE Courses: Take Any Two
HIS201:
African Cultures and Civilisations to c.
150 (3)
HIS211:
The Rise of Europe World Dominance [3]
(pre-requisite ARC 101, His 102)
HIS213:
Poverty, Economic Growth and 		
Affluence in Western Europe and 		
America.[3]
PLUS
ELH290: Theory of Teaching History
Plus 2/3 credits of Electives or GEC
Special Education - Single Major
IN-SERVICE (18 Credits)
CORE (to be taken by all)
EFS201
Psychology of exceptional children [3]
Plus One course from the Followings
EFS240
Curriculum and instructional Methods
for Students with Mild to 		
Moderate Mental Retardation [3]
EFS250
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with learning Disabilities/		
difficulties[3]
Optional Courses: One course from the Followings
EFS220
Braille Reading and Writing with visual
Impairment [3]

EFS230
Plus GEC
ICT121E

Communication Process for 		
students with Hearing impairment [3]
Computing and Information Skills I (2)

Plus
Any Elective Course [3]
Level 3
Semester: 1 (17-18 Credits)
Double Major: Special Education & History
CORE
EFS301:
Educational Assessments and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities (3 credits)
Plus One Area relevant to SPED 		
Specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320:
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment [3]
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS330:
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf [3]
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS350:
Developmental Approaches and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Learning Disabilities [3]
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340:
Teaching School Subjects to Students with
Mental Retardation [3]
Second Major: History
Take any Two
HIS331
African Diaspora in the Islamic World &
Asia [3]
HIS333
Intro to Foreign Policy, Diplomacy and
International Relations 1800-1945 [3]
HIS335
Colonial Latin America to 1830 (3)
HIS343
Trade & Politics in Central African 		
Kingdoms [3]
Plus
ELC300:
Education for Self-Reliance [3]
ELC302:
Gender Issues and Social Studies [3]
Double major: Special Education & Theology
and Religious Studies
CORE
EFS301:

Educational Assessment & Identification
of Students with Disabilities [3]
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320:
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment [3]
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS330
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS350
Developmental Approaches and 		
Behavioural Management of 		
Students with Learning Disabilities/		
Difficulties [3]
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340:
Methods in Teaching School Subjects
to Students with Mental Retardation/
Intellectual disabilities [3]

42

Theology and Religious Studies
Take any Two
TRS301: Christology [3]
TRS302: Missionaries in 19 Century South Africa [3]
TRS304: African Philosophy and Culture [3]
TRS303: Creation and the Bible [3]
Plus
ELR301: Theory and Practice of Religious 		
Education in Secondary Schools (3 Credits)
Moral Education Students Take
ELM301 Theory of Religious Education [3]
PLUS
One GEC or Elective ( 2-3 credits)
Double Major: Special Education & Science
CORE
EFS301:
Educational Assessment and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities [3]
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS 320: Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment [3]
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS 330: Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf [3]
LEARNING DISABILITIES/DIFFICULTIES
EFS 350
Developmental Approaches and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Learning Disabilities (3)
EFS 340
Teaching School Subjects to Students
with Mental Retardation/Intellectual
Disabilities [3]
Choose one of a, b, c or d
a) BIOLOGY Core
ESB361:
Teaching in the Contemporary Biology
Classroom (3) Pre-requisite: Pass ESS262
BIO316:
Plant Physiology (3)
BIO307:
Biochemistry (3) Pre-requisite Pass: BIO211
BIO317:
Comparative Vertebrate Physiology [3]
Pre-requisite: Pass BIO214 Genetics
b) CHEMISTRY Core
ESC361
Introductory Pedagogical Content 		
Knowledge in School Chemistry (3)
Pre-requisite: Pass ESS262
CHE321: Coordination Chemistry (2 Credits) Prerequisite: Pass CHEM 221/223
CHE323: Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory II (credit
1) Pre-requisite: Pass CHEM 223
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamic 		
& Electrochemistry (2 credits) 		
Pre-requisite: Pass CHEM 242
CHEM343 Physical Chemistry Laboratory III 		
(1 credit) Pre-requisite: Pass 		
CHEM 242/244
c) MATHEMATICS Core
ESM361: Teaching Strategies for School 		
Mathematics (3 credits) Pre-requisite:
Grade D or above in MAT 211
MAT321: Real Analysis I (3 credits) Pre-requisite:
Grade D or above in MAT 221
Plus, (choose one)
MAT251: Vectors and Introductory Mechanics [3]
Pre-requisite: Pass MAT 122
MAT323: Vector Calculus (3 credits) Pre-requisite:
Pass MAT 222

d) PHYSICS Core
ESP361: Pedagogic Strategies for School Physics
(3 credits) Pre-requisite Pass ESS 262
PHY351: Advanced Mechanics (3) Pre-requisite
=PHY231
PHY352: Introduction to quantum Mechanics [3]
Pre-requisite =PHY231
PHY359: Physics Practicals 5 (2) Pre-requisite
=PHY239 & 249)
Plus GEC 2 credits
Double Major: Special Education & African Languages
and Literature
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS301:
Educational Assessment and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities [3]
Plus one area relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320:
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment [3]
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS330
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf [3]
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS350
Developmental Approach and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Disabilities/Difficulties [3]
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340:
Methods of Teaching School Subjects to
Students with Mental Retardation [3]
Plus one of the following:
SECOND MAJOR: AFRICAN LANGUAGES
ALL321
The Structure of the Sentence (3)
ALL322
The Structure of Meaning (3)
ALL341
Introduction to Literary Theory [3]
Plus
ELL301
Curriculum and Policy Issues in 		
Language Education [3]
		
Double Major: Special Education & English
CORE
EFS301:
Educational Assessment and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities (3)
Plus one area of Special Education Area of 		
specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320:
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS330
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS350
Developmental Approach and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340:
Methods of Teaching School Subjects to
Students with Mental Retardation (3)
SECOND MAJOR: ENGLISH
Take any Two
ENG311
ENG317
ENG327

ENG332
ENG334
ENG341:
ENG342:
ENG351:
ENG352:
ENG363:
ENG373:
Plus
ELL301

English Romantic Poetry:
The Early Romantics (3)
Commonwealth Literature (3)
Introduction to Socio-linguistics 		
(3 credits)
Elizabethan and Jacobean Literature:
Drama (3)
Phonology in English (3 Credits)
The Metaphysical Poet (3 credits)
Oral Literature (3 credits)
Botswana Literature (3)
Curriculum and Policy Issues in 		
Language Education (3)

Plus
Any GEC or Elective (2-3 credits)
Double Major: Special Education & Environmental
Science
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS301:
Educational Assessment and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities (3)
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320:
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment (3)
HEARING INPAIRMENT
EFS330
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS350
Developmental Approach and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340
Methods of Teaching School Subjects to
Students with Mental Retardation (3)
Environmental Science
Take any Two from the following
ENS301:
Contemporary Environmental issues (3)
ENS302: Sustainable Development (3)
ENS341: Advanced Quantitative Methods in 		
Environmental Science (3)
Plus
EEL301:
Introduction to Environmental Education (3)
Plus
GEC or Elective (2-3 credits)
Double Major: Special Education & Social Studies
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS301
Educational Assessment and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities (3)
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment (3
credits)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS330
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf (3)

Modern English Grammar (3)
African Drama (3)
Practical Theater (3)

43

MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340:
Methods in Teaching School Subjects
to Students with Mental Retardation/
Intellectual disabilities (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES/DIFFICULTIES
EFS350
Developmental Approaches and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Social Studies
Take All
ELC300
Education for Self Reliance (3)
ELC302
Gender Issues in Social Studies (3)
Plus
2 Electives Courses (5-6 credits)
Single Major: Special Education
IN- SERVICE: (15 – 18 credits)
CORE (To be taken by All)
EFS301:
Educational Assessments and 		
Identification of Students 		
with Disabilities (3)
Plus One Areas of Specialization
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS350:
Developmental Approaches and 		
Behavioural Management of Students
with Learning Disabilities (3)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS340:
Methods of Teaching School Subjects to
Students with Mental Retardation (3)
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS320:
Advanced Mobility and Orientation for
Students with Visual Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS330:
Approaches in Teaching Language to
the Deaf (3)
Optional Course: Take One (Not in your area of
Specialization)
EFS240:
Curriculum and instructional Methods
for Students with Mild to Moderate
Mental Retardation [3]
EFS250:
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
students with learning disabilities/		
difficulties [3]
EFS220:
Braille Reading and Writing with visual
Impairment [3]
EFS230:
Communication Process for students with
Hearing impairment [3]
Plus (Only for UB diploma SpED) 8
COM161E Communication and Study Skills I (3)
ICT121E Computing and Information Skills I (2)
Plus
Any Elective Course (2/3 Credits)
LEVEL 4
SEMESTER 1 (15-18 Credits)
Double Major: Special Education and History
SPED: CORE
EFS401
Rehabilitation & Transition of children
with disabilities (3)
EFR220: Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low vision (3)
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment (3)

EFS440
EFS450

School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with 		
Mental Retardation (3)
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span (3 credits)

SECOND MAJOR: CORE COURSES
HIS401
Mfecane and the Settler Scramble South
Africa (3)
Plus One from the following:
HIS431
Natives and Settlers in Early North 		
America (3)
HIS441
Slave Trade and Colonial Conquests in
East Africa (3)
HIS443
Islam, Imperialism and the Military in the
Making of Modern Egypt (3)
HIS445
Globalization and Third World 		
Economies in Africa, Latin America and
South East Asia
Plus One from the following:
ELC400
Socialization Issues (3)
ELC403
Economic Cooperation and Integration(3)
Double major: Special Education and Theology and
Religious Studies
SPED CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS401
Rehabilitation and Transition for 		
Children and Youth with Disabilities [3]
EFR220: Introduction to Educational Research [3]
Plus One course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low vision [3]
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with 		
Mental Retardation [3]
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span [3]
SECOND MAJOR: CORE COURSE
ELR401

Teaching Religious Education In 		
Secondary Schools [3]

Take Two from the following, with one being in the area
of specialization
TRS401
New Religious Movements [3]
TRS402
Religion and Politics (3)
TRS403
The Doctrine of Sin in the Bible [3]
TRS404
Metaphysics IV: Personal Identity[3]
Double Major: Special Education & Moral Education
Special Education
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS401
EFR220
EFS420
EFS430
EFS440
EFS450

Rehabilitation and Transition of Children
with disabilities [3]
Introduction to educational Research [3]
Plus One Area Relevant to SPED 		
specialization
Teaching Students with Low vision [3]
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with 		
Mental Retardation [3]
Educational Services for Individuals with

Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span [3]
Second Major: Moral Education
ELM401 Practice of Moral Education [3]
TRS401
New religious movements [3]
Optional Courses (Take one)
ELM492 Evaluation of Moral education 		
curriculum in Botswana 		
secondary schools [3]
TRS407
Socio-cultural, legal and political 		
structures of Islam (3)
TRS409
African Christian Theologies [3]
TRS410
Theories of Government [3]
TRS411
Politics and development of biblical
thought [3]
TRS412
Ecumenical Theologies (3)
Double Major: Special Education and Science
SPED: CORE
EFS401
Rehabilitation and Transition of Children
and Youth with Disabilities (3)
EFR220: Introduction to Educational Research [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low Vision [3]
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation (3)
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span [3]
MATHS/SCIENCE CORE COURSES
(Pick from your specialization) A B C D
(A) Biology (Take All)
ESB461
Critical Debates in Biology Education
(Pre-requisites: Pass ESB 362] [3]
ESS441
Information and Communication 		
Technology for the Science Teacher (2)
BIO409
Life History Strategies [3]
BIO421
Entomology [3]
(B) Chemistry
ESC461
Further Issues in Chemistry Pedagogical
Content Knowledge [3]
ESS441
Information and communication 		
technology for the science teacher (2)
Plus
TWO from the following teaching
CHE421
Advanced Transition Metal Chemistry
[3][ Pre.req. Pass CHE322]		
CHE431
Heterocyclic Chemistry, Synthetic 		
reaction & Design of Organic Synthesis
[3][ Pre.req. Pass CHE332]
CHE441
Advanced Physical Chemistry [3]		
[ Pre.req. Pass CHE341]
(C) Mathematics (Take All)
ESM461 Advanced Teaching Methods in School
Maths [3][ Pre.req. Pass ESM362]
ESM441 Introduction to ICT in Mathematics
Education (2 credits)
MAT421 Functions of a Complex Variable [3]
MAT423 Mathematical Methods (3)[ Pre.req. Pass
MAT324]
(D) Physics (Take All)
ESP461
Advanced Pedagogic Strategies for 		
School Physics [3][ Pre.req. Pass ESP362]

44

ESS441
PHY472
PHY473
PHY489

Information and communication 		
technology for the science teacher (2)
Statistical Mechanics [3]
Solid State Physics [3]
Physics Practicals 7.1 (2) [ Pre.req. = PHY
359 and 369]

Double Major: Special Education and African Language
and Literature (Pre-service & In-Service)
SPED: CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS401
Rehabilitation & Transition of Children
with Disabilities [3]
EFR220:
Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420:
Teaching Students with Low Vision (3)
EFS430:
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties across
the Life Span[3]
SECOND MAJOR: African language and Literature
Take Two of the following
ALL421:
Introduction to Historical and 		
Comparative Linguistics Based on Africa
[3]
ALL422
A Socio-linguistic Study of Southern
Africa [3]
ALL441
World Literature in Setswana Translation
[3]
Plus
ELL401
Foundations of Multi-Cultural Literacy
Education [3]
Double Major: Special Education and English
SPED: CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS401
Rehabilitation & Transition of Children
with Disabilities [3]
EFR220
Introduction to Educational Research [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low Vision [3]
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties across
the Life Span [3]
SECOND MAJOR
English (Take any Two)
ENG412 Introductions to Shakespeare [3]
ENG421 Approaches to Syntax (3)
ENG415 Readings in Literary Theory I [3]
ENG331 Language Acquisition [3]
ENG441 Introduction to Pragmatics [3]
ENG413 The African Novel [3]
ENG417 Theory and Practice of Drama (3)
ENG427 Dramatic Literature [3]
ENG471 Introduction to Literary Stylistics (2)
Plus
ELL401
Foundations of Multi-Cultural Literacy
Education [3]
Double Major: Special Education and Primary Education
CORE
EFS401
Rehabilitation and Transition of Children
with Disabilities (3)
EFR220
Introduction to Educational Research(3)

Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low Vision (3)
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment (3)
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation (3)
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span (3)
Plus CORE courses and optional course relevant to
concentration in Primary Education from one of the
following:
1. Language Concentration (Choose Three)
EPL411
Teaching Reading in the Primary School
(3)
EPL414
Literature for primary schools (3)
ENG421 Approaches to Syntax (3)
ALL321
The Structure of Sentence (3)
2. Mathematics & Science Concentration
EPM426
Introduction to Derivatives & their
Application (3 credits, pre-req. EPM 327)
EPM429 Advanced Concepts in Biology & Earth
Science (3)
Plus
1 elective (3)
3. Social Studies & Religious Education
Concentration
EPS401
The Role of Democracy in the Teaching
of Social Studies (3 credits)
ELC431
Civic Education (3)
OR
ELC461 Human Rights Issues (3)
Plus
1 Elective (3 credits)
4. Practical Subjects Concentration
A. Art Education Concentration
CORE
EPP405
Integrated Arts Education in Cultural
Context (4 credits)
OPTIONAL COURSES
ENG427 Theory & Practice in Drama [3]
EPL411
Teaching Reading in the Primary School
[3]
EPL414
Literature for Primary Schools [3]
EPI431
Management of Early Childhood 		
Programme [3]
EPM429 Advanced Concepts in Biology and Earth
Sciences [3]
EPI442
Environmental Conservation 		
Strategies [3]
EFP301
Adult-Child Interaction and 		
Cognitive Development [3]
B. Music Education Concentration
CORE
EPP447
Basic Instrumental Skills (4 credits)
Plus one Optional Course from the following
PHR424 Movement & Creative Dance Technique
(2)
PHR313
Nutrition & Sports Performance (2)
FCS302
Consumer Education & Protection (2)
PHR309 Adapted Physical Education (2)
PHR400 Track & Field Athletics [3]
Plus
1 Elective [3]

Double Major: Special Education and Environmental
Science
SPED: CORE
EFS401
Rehabilitation & Transition of Children
with Disabilities [3]
EFR220: Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low Vision [3]
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span [3]
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Core
ELL401
Environmental Education Conservation
Strategies [3]
Take any Two course from the following:
ENS450 : The African Environment [3]
ENS451 : Rural Development Theory and Practice
[3]
ENS467 : Ecotourism (3)
ENV423 :Urban Social Theory [3]
ENS403 : Environmental Hazards and Disaster
Management [3]
SECONDARY IN-SERVICE – Maths/Science
SPED: CORE
EFS401
Rehabilitation and Transition of Children
and Youth with Disabilities [3]
EFR220: Introduction to Educational Research [3]
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low Vision (3)
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment (3)
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span (3)
Plus CORE COURSES FROM THE FOLLOWING
MATHEMATICS TEACHERS
A. CORE COURSES
MATHEMATICS EDUCATION
ESM461 Advanced Teaching Methods in School
Mathematics [3]
MATHEMATICS (FACULTY OF SCIENCE)
Mathematics
MAT483 Real Analysis for Teachers [3]
MAT485 Number Theory & Abstract Algebra for
Teachers [3]
B. OPTIONAL COURSES (Choose any two)
ESM441
Introduction to Info. & Communication
Tech. in Maths Education [3]
ESM471 Contemporary Issues in Maths 		
Education (2)
ESM481 Research Projects in Maths/Science
Education (2 credits)

45

SCIENCE TEACHERS (FACULTY OF SCIENCE)
A.CORE COURSES
SCIENCE EDUCATION (CHOOSE ONE)
ESB461
Critical debates in Biology Education [3]
ESC461
Further Issues I Chemistry Pedagogic
Content [3]
ESP461

Advanced Pedagogic Strategies for School
Physics [3]

SCIENCES (FACULTY OF SCIENCE)
(Continue with ONE of the Teaching Subjects Taken in
Level Three)
Biology
BIO316
BIO317

Invertebrate Zoology [3]
Comparative Vertebrate Physiology [3]

Chemistry
CHE321
Coordination chemistry (2)
CHE323 Inorganic chemistry Laboratory II (1)
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamics and
Electrochemistry (2)
CHE343 Physical Chemistry laboratory III (1)
Physics
PHY311
PHY312
PHY319

Mechanics (2)
Quantum Mechanics I (2)
Physics Practicals 3.1 (2)

B. OPTIONAL COURSES (Choose any one)
ESS 441 Introduction to Info. & Communic. 		
Techn. In Science Education (2)
ESS 471
Contemporary Issues in Science 		
Education (2)
ESS 481 Research Projects in Maths/Science
Education (2)
Special Education and Social Studies
SPED: CORE
EFS401
Rehabilitation and Transition of Children
and Youth with Disabilities (3 credits)
EFR220: Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Plus one course relevant to SPED specialization
EFS420
Teaching Students with Low Vision[3]
EFS430
Educating Students with Hearing 		
Impairment [3]
EFS440
School- and Community-Based 		
Programmes for Individuals with Mental
Retardation [3]
EFS450
Educational Services for Individuals with
Learning Disabilities/ Difficulties Across
the Life Span [3]
Second Major- Social Studies
ELC400
Socialization Issues [3]ELC 403 Economic
Cooperation and Integration[3]
Optional (Take One)
ELC431
Civic Education (3)
ELC461
Human Rights issues (3)
NB. Please note that some courses may change in that
case then contact the respective department concerned
for appropriate courses.
SEMESTER 2
LEVEL 1 (Pre-service)
Double Major: Special Education and History (16)
CORE
EFS102

Service Delivery Approaches in Special
Education (3)

EFS103
EFS104
COM162
ICT122E

Medical Aspects of Disability (3)
Introduction to Procedures for 		
Assessment of Disabilities (3)
Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education) (3)
Computer & Information Skills II (2)

Second Major: History
HIS102
Introduction to the Study of History (2)
Take an Elective (2-3 credits)
Double Major:Special Education and English (20)
CORE Courses
EFS102
Service Delivery Approaches in Special
Education (3)
EFS103
Medical Aspects of Disability [3]
EFS104
Introduction to Procedures for 		
Assessment of Disabilities (3)
COM162 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education) (3)
ICT122E Computer & Information Skills II (2)
Second Major: English
ENG123 Introduction to Literature Drama &
Poetry (3)
ENG131 Writing in English (3)
Double Major: Special Education and African Languages
& Literature (18 credits)
CORE Courses
EFS102
Service Delivery Approaches in Special
Education (3)
EFS103
Medical Aspects of Disability (3)
EFS104
Introduction to Procedures for 		
Assessment of Disabilities (3)
COM162 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education) (3)
ICT122E Computer & Information Skills II (2)
Second Major: African Language and Literature
ALL121
Introduction to the study of Language
and Linguistics (3)
ALL142
The Study of Drama in Indigenous 		
Languages (2)
LEVEL 2
Double Major: Special Education and English: (17-18)
FOR EACH SPED MAJOR TAKE ALL COURSES
Visual Impairment
EFS221
Instructional Methods for Students with
Visual Impairment (3)
EFS223
Mobility and Orientation for the Visually
Impaired (3)
Hearing Impairment
EFS231
School Audiometry and Evaluation of
Hearing (3)
EFS233
Development of Education for the 		
Hearing Impaired (3)
Learning Disabilities
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School 		
Subject for Students with Learning
Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
EFS253
Secondary School Programmes for 		
Students with Learning 		
Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Mental Retardation/Intellectual Disabilities
EFS241
Programme Development for 		
Students with Mental Retardation(3)
EFS242
Early Intervention Programmes for 		
Young Children with Mental Retardation
(3)

Second Major: English
ENGLISH - CORE
ENG221
Introduction to English Linguistics (3)
ELE291
Practical Approaches to the teaching of
English language & Literature
OR
ELS291
Practice of Teaching Setswana (3)
Optional Course (Choose One from the following)
ENG222 Introduction to English literature: Poetry
and Drama [3]
ENG233 The Poetry of Southern Africa (3 credits)
ENG217 Theatre History [3]

Hearing Impairment
EFS231
School Audiometry and Evaluation of
Hearing (3)
EFS233
Development of Education for the 		
Hearing Impaired (3)
Learning Disabilities
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School 		
Subject for Students with Learning
Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
EFS253
Secondary School Programmes for
Student with Learning Disabilities /		
Difficulties (3)

Plus one elective or GEC of 2-3 credits
Plus ETP200 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education; African
Languages & Literature

Mental Retardation/Intellectual Disabilities
EFS241
Programme Development for Students
with Mental Retardation (3)
EFS242
Early Intervention Programmes for 		
Young Children with Mental Retardation (3)
SECOND MAJOR

FOR EACH SPED MAJOR TAKE ALL COURSES
Take A, B, C, OR D
Visual Impairment
EFS221
Instructional Methods for Students with
Visual Impairment (3)
EFS223
Mobility and Orientation for the Visually
Impaired (3)
Hearing Impairment
EFS231
School Audiometry and Evaluation of
Hearing (3)
EFS233
Development of Education for the 		
Hearing Impaired (3)
Learning Disabilities
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School 		
Subject for Students with Learning
Disabilities/Difficulties ((3)
EFS253
Secondary School Programmes for 		
Students with Learning Disabilities. /
Difficulties (3)
Mental Retardation/Intellectual Disabilities
EFS241
Programme Development for Students
with Mental Retardation (3)
EFS242
Early Intervention Programmes for 		
Young Children with Mental Retardation
(3)
Second Major: African Languages and Literature
CORE Take ALL
ALL222
The Structure of Words in African 		
Language (3)
ALL242
African Written Poetry (3)
ELL291
The Teaching of Literature at Secondary
School (3)
OPTIONAL – CHOOSE ONE
ALL233
Generative Phonology in African 		
Languages (3)
ALL253: The Sociology of Literature (3)
Plus
ETP200 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education and
Maths/Science
FOR EACH SPED MAJOR TAKE ALL COURSES
Visual Impairment
EFS221
Instructional Methods for Students with
Visual Impairment (3)
EFS223
Mobility and Orientation for the Visually
Impaired (3)

46

A. Mathematics
Core
ESM262 Practicum in Secondary School 		
Mathematic (3) (Pre-requisite pass ESM
261)
MAT212 Introductory Linear to Algebra (3credits)
Prereq.MAT111orA-Level (Pre-requisite *
Grade D or above in MAT 111)
MAT222 Calculus11 (3) Pre-req. *Grade D or 		
above in MAT221
Plus one elective or GEC (3)
B. Biology
Core Take All
ESS262
Practicum in Secondary School Science
teaching (3 credits) (Pre-req, pass ESS 261)
BIO 211
Cell Biology (3 credits) (Pre-req, Pass
BIO111/112)
BIO213
Plant Structure and Function (3) Pre-req,
Pass BIO111/112)
Plus one elective or GEC (3)
C. Chemistry – (take all) Core
ESS262
Practicum in Secondary School Science
(3) Pre-req, Pass ESS 261)
CHE221
Atomic Structure Bonding and Group
Chem. (2 credits) (Pre-req CHE 102)
CHE223 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory 1 		
(1credit) (Pre-req, Pass CHE 102
CHE242 Introductory Physical Chemistry (2) (Prereq, Pass CHE 102)
CHE244 Physical Chemistry Laboratory 1 (1) (Prereq CHE102)
D. Physics– (take all) Core
ESS262
Practicum in Secondary School Science
(3) (Pre-req, Pass in ESS 261
PHY241
Advanced Electricity and Magnetism (3
(Pre-req, Pass PHY 122
PHY242 Basic Electronics (3credits) (Pre-req, Pass
PHY122
PHY249 Physics Practical 4.1 (1 credits) Pre-Req,
Pass PHY122, co-requisites PHY 241 or
242)

Plus ETP200 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education and History
FOR EACH SPED MAJOR TAKE ALL COURSES
Visual Impairment
EFS221
Instructional Methods for Students with
Visual Impairment (3)
EFS223
Mobility and Orientation for the Visually
Impaired (3)
Hearing Impairment
EFS231
School Audiometry and Evaluation of
Hearing (3)
EFS233
Development of Education for the 		
Hearing Impaired (3)
Learning Disabilities
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School 		
Subject for Students with Learning
Disabilities/Difficulties. (3)
EFS253
Secondary School Programmes for 		
Students with Learning 		
Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Mental Retardation/Intellectual Disabilities
EFS241
Programme Development for Students
with Mental Retardation (3)
EFS242
Early Intervention Programmes for 		
Young Children with Mental Retardation
(3)
SECOND MAJOR: History
Core
ELH291
Practice of Teaching History (3)
HIS202
Africa in the Era of the Atlantic Slave
Trade c. 1500 to c.1800 (3)
Optional
Take one course from the following:
HIS212
Catastrophe and Survival in 20th 		
Century Europe (3)
HIS214
Agriculture and Industrializations in the
World Economy to 1945 (3)
Plus one GEC or Elective of 2-3 credits
Plus ETP200 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education and Environmental
Science
FOR EACH SPED MAJOR TAKE ALL COURSES
Visual Impairment
EFS221 Instructional Methods for Students with
Visual Impairment (3)
EFS223
Mobility and Orientation for the Visually
Impaired (3)
Hearing Impairment
EFS231
School Audiometry and Evaluation of
Hearing (3)
EFS233
Development of Education for the 		
Hearing Impaired(3)
Learning Disabilities
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School 		
Subject for Students with Learning
Disabilities. /Difficulties (3)
EFS253
School Programmes for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Mental Retardation/Intellectual Disabilities
EFS241
Programme Development for Students
with Mental Retardation (3)
EFS242
Early Intervention Programmes for 		
Young Children with Mental Retardation
(3)

SECOND MAJOR
Environmental Science
Core
ELG291
Practice of Teaching Geography 		
Education(3)
ENS241
Quantitative Techniques in 		
Environmental Science(3)
ENS252
Botswana Environment(3)
PLUS
One Elective
ETP200
Teaching Practice
Special Education - Single Major
IN-SERVICE (17 Credits)
CORE
CHOOSE ONE AREA OF CONCENTRATION FROM THE
FOLLOWING
(Continue with the area taken in Semester 1)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS241
Programme Development for Students
with Mental Retardation (3 credits)
EFS242
Early Childhood Intervention for young
children with Mental Retardation (3
marks)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School 		
Subjects for students with learning
Disabilities/difficulties (3)
EFS253
Secondary School Programmes for 		
Students with Learning 		
Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
PLUS ONE AREA FROM THE FOLLOWING OPTIONAL
COURSES: (Continue with the area taken in Semester 1)
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS221
Instructional Methods for Students with
Visual Impairment (3)
EFS222
Early Stimulation Programmes for 		
Children with Visual Impairments (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS231
School Audiometry and Evaluation of
Hearing [3]
EFS232
Early Childhood Programmes for 		
Children with Hearing Impairment (3)
Plus GEC
COM162 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education) (3)
ICT122E Computing and Information Skills I
(2credits)
LEVEL 3
Double Major: Special Education & English (17-18
credits)
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302
Education of the Gifted and Talented (3)
Plus One Area Relevant to SPED 		
specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communications and Language 		
Development for Students with Visual
Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS331
Advanced Communication Processes for
Students with Hearing Impairment (3)

47

MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Educations for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Second Major: English
Take All
ELL302
The teaching of Literature at Secondary
School level (3)
ENG311
Modern English Grammar (3)
OPTIONAL Courses
Take One
ENG343 Modern African Poetry (3)
ENG362 English Romantic Poetry(3)
ENG383 Critical Issues in Modern African
Literature 2 (3)
ENG393 Current thoughts in the Literature of
African Diaspora (3)
Plus one Elective or GEC of 2-3 credits
Plus ETP 300 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education & African Languages
& Literature
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302
Education of the Gifted and Talented (3)
Plus One Area Relevant to SPED 		
specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communications and Language 		
Development for Students with Visual
Impairment (3 credits)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS331
Advanced Communication Processes for
Students with Hearing Impairment (3
credits)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Education for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties 		
(3 credits)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
Second Major: AFRICAN LANGUAGES & Literature (TAKE
ALL)
ELL302
The Teaching of Literature at Secondary
School Level (3)
ALL342
African Oral Narratives (3)
ALL343
Introduction to African Popular Theatre
(3)
Plus one Elective or GEC 2-3 credits
Plus ETP 300 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education & Theology and
Religious Studies
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302
Education of the gifted and talented (3)
Plus one area course relevant to SPED
specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communication and Language 		
Development for Students with Visual
Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS331
Advanced Communication Processes for
Students with Hearing Impairment

MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Education for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Second Major: THEOLOGY AND RELIGIOUS STUDIES
CORE
ELR302
TRS314

Practice of Religious Education (3 credits)
Christian Moral Theology (3)

Plus optional courses: Choose two from the Following
TRS318
Beginning Biblical Hebrew II Translation
of Biblical Texts (3)
TRS319
Philosophy of Religion (3)
TRS322
History of Christianity in Southern Africa
(3)
TRS325
Foundation Structures of Islam (3)
PLUS GEC or Elective of 2-3 credits
Plus ETP 300 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education & History
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302 Education of the Gifted and Talented (3)
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communication and Language 		
Development for 			
Students with Visual Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS331
Advanced Communication Processes for
Students with Hearing Impairment (3)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Education for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Second Major: HISTORY
HIS306
Philosophy of History & Research Project
Proposal (3)
ELC311
Multicultural Educations (3)
ELC312
Conflicts & Conflict Resolution in Africa
(3)
Plus Optional Courses. Choose one.
HIS332
African Diaspora in the Caribbean and
the Americas (3)
HIS334
Superpowers in the 20th Century (3)
HIS336
Modern Latin America (3)
HIS344
The Roots of Crisis in Modern Central
Africa (3)
Plus ETP 300 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education & Environmental
Science
Special Education
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302 Education of the Gifted and Talented (3)
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communications and Language 		
Development for Students with Visual
Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT

EFS331

Advanced Communication Processes for
Students with Hearing Impairment (3)

MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Educations for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
SECOND MAJOR:
Environmental Science
Core courses take all
EEL302
Environmental Education Methodology
(3)
Optional Take Any Two
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis (3)
ENS352
Globalization, Socio-economic & 		
Environmental Change (3)
ENS361
Techniques in Population Geography (3)
ENS363
Health Care Geography (3)
ENS364
Urban & Rural Survey Technique		
(3)
ENS368
Methods & Techniques in Tourism (3)
PLUS GEC or Elective of 2 to 3 credits
Plus ETP 300 Teaching Practice
Double Major: Special Education & Science

Plus one of:
BIO306
Developmental Biology (3)
BIO308
Molecular Biology (3)
b. CHEMISTRY
ESC362
Advanced Practicum in School 		
Chemistry (3)
Plus two from the following:
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2) 		
( Pre-req CHE 211)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Lab II (1) ( Pre-req
CHEM 311)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2) (Pre-req
CHEM 232, CHE 331) (3)
CHE3341 1 Organic Chemistry Lab II (1) 		
(Pre-req CHE 234; CHEM 331) (1)
d. PHYSICS
ESP362
Advanced Practicum in School Physics.
(3)
PHY361
Introduction to Electromagnetism
Pre-req. PHY 241] (3)
PHY362 Analytical Thermodynamic
[Pre-reqt. PHY 232] (3)
PHY369 Physics Practicals 6.1 (2)
Plus ETP 300 Teaching Practice
SINGLE MAJOR: Special Education (18)
IN-SERVICE
CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302 Education of the Gifted and Talented (3)

CORE (To be taken by all)
EFS302
Education of the Gifted and Talented (3)
Plus one area course relevant to SPED specialization
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communication and Language 		
Development for Students with Visual
Impairment (3)
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
EFS331
Advanced Communication Processes for
students with hearing Impairment
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Education for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
Second Major: Science
Continue with One of the following areas of
concentration
a. MATHEMATICS
ESM362 Advanced Practicum in School 		
Mathematics (3)
Plus two from the following
MAT312 Abstract Algebra II [Pre req. MAT 311] (3)
MAT324 Differential Equation [Pre req. MAT 222]
(3)
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3)
b. BIOLOGY
ESB362
Advanced Practicum in School Biology
(3)
BIO305
Insect Pest/Vector Control (3 credits)
BIO215
Principles of Ecology [Pre-req. for 		
BIO 434] (3)

48

Plus One AREA of concentration from the following
CORE courses (continue with the Area selected in
Semester 1)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
EFS351
Career Education for Students with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
MENTAL RETARDATION
EFS341
Society and Children with Mental 		
Retardation (3)
PLUS ONE AREA OF CONCENTRATION FROM THE
FOLLOWING OPTIONAL COURSES: (Continue with the
Area selected in Semester 1)
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
EFS321
Communication and Language 		
Development for Students with 		
Visual Impairment ((3)
HEARING INPAIRMENT
EFS331
Advanced Communication Processes for
Students with Hearing Impairment (3)
PLUS
COM162E Communication and Study Skills (3)
ICT22E
Computing and Information 		
Skills (3)
LEVEL 4
Double Major: Special Education and Environmental
Science (15-19 credits)
FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION
CORE Courses:
EFS400
Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in SPED (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping families of 		
Students with Disabilities(3)

Plus One OPTIONAL Course from the following:
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Children with ADHD (3)
SECOND MAJOR: Environmental Science
CORE Course:
ELC411
Curriculum Development for Social
Studies Teacher (3)
ELC404
Development of Social Studies 		
Instructional Materials (3)
Plus any TWO of the following courses:
ENS402
Natural Resource Management and
Economics (3 credits)
ENS454
Industrialization Trends in the 		
Developing World (3)
ENS466
Urbanization in Developing Countries (3)
ENS408
Tourism and Development (3)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography (3)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing & Analysis (3)
ENS450
African Environment (3)
ENS452
Rural Development in Botswana (3)
ENS456
Transport & Environment (3)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (3)
DOUBLE MAJOR: Special Education and Theology &
Religious Studies
FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION
CORE Courses
EFS400
Project: Issues and Concerns in SPED (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with disabilities (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course (One of the following)
EFS403
Speech correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Students with ADHD (3)
SECOND MAJOR: THEOLOGY & RELIGIOUS STUDIES
CORE courses:
ELR402
Curriculum Design in Religious 		
Education (3)
TRS415
Twentieth Century Theologians (3)
TRS416
Religion and Modernity (3)
Plus One OPTIONAL Course
ELR492
Evaluation of RE curriculum in Botswana
TRS417
Paul’s Epistle (3)
TRS418
Contemporary African Philosophy (3)
TRS421
History of Christianity: Modern and
Contemporary (3)
TRS424
Buddhism (3)
TRS426
Religious rituals and Sacred Places (3)
TRS428
Religious Pluralism (3)

1. Language Concentration
CORE Courses: Take any Two
ENG451 Introduction to Semantics (3)
EPL412
Teaching Reading in the Primary School
(3)
ALL342
African Oral Narratives (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course (Choose One)
ENG435 Readings in Literary Theory 2 (3)
EPE411
Educational Management and 		
Curriculum Development (2 credits)
ALL354
The Contemporary Setswana Novel (3)
2. Mathematics and Science
CORE Courses:
EPM427 Calculus II (3 credits, pre-req. EPM 426)
EPM428 Advanced Concepts in Physics and 		
Chemistry (3)
3. Social Studies and Religious Education
CORE Courses:
EPS400
Contemporary Issues in Teaching 		
Primary Social Studies (3)
EPS403
International Organizations and 		
Governance (3)
Plus 1 Elective or GEC
4. Practical Subjects:
ONE from the Practical Subject chosen at Level 2/3:
i. Art Education
EPP406
Contemporary Issues in Art Education (4)

Plus OPTIONAL Course (One of the following):
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Children with ADHD (3)

CORE Courses:
EFS400
Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in Special Education (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with Disabilities (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course: (One of the following)
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Students with ADHD(3)
Second Major: African Languages and Literature
ELL402
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Literacy
Education(3)
Plus One (CORE) course from the following
ALL423
The Bantu and Khoe-San Languages of
Southern Africa (3 credits)
ALL442
Creative Writing, Theory and Practice (3)
ALL443
Oral Poetry in Botswana (3)
Optional
Choose One Optional Course from the following
ELL405
Materials Development and Evaluation
in Language Education (3 Credits)
ALL434
Introduction to applied Linguistics (3)
ALL454
Children’s tradition and Dramatics (3)
ALL455
Postcolonial Theory and African 		
Literature (2)

ii. Music Education
EPP449
Movement in Music (4)
Plus One Elective or GEC (2-3 credits)

Double major: Special Education and Social Studies

Double Major: Special Education and English
FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION

CORE Courses:

FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION

EFS400
CORE Courses
EFS400
Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in Special Education (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with Disabilities (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course (Choose One of the following)
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Students with ADHD [3]

EFS402

Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in SPED (3)
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with Disabilities (3)

Plus OPTIONAL Course: Choose One of the following).
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3 credits)
EFS404
Education of Children with ADHD (3
credits)
SECOND MAJOR: SOCIAL STUDIES

Second Major: English
CORE
ELL402
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Literacy
Education [3]
ENG451 Introduction to Semantics [3]

Double major: Special Education and Primary Education
FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION
CORE Courses: (Take all)
EFS400
Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in SPED (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with Disabilities (3)

Double major: Special Education and African Languages
& Literature
		
FIRST MAJOR- SPECIAL EDUCATION

Plus One Optional English courses from the following
ELL405
Material Development and evaluation in
Language Education [3]
ENG411
Form, Function and Variation in English [3]
ENG431 Introduction to Discourse analysis [3]
ENG443 The African Novel II [3]
ENG463 Gender Issues in African Literature [3]
ENG481 Language and Gender [3]
ENG482 Modern English Drama [3]
ENG492 Modern English Poetry [3]
ENG434 Non-European World Literature [3]

CORE Course:
ELC411
ELC404

Curriculum Design for Social Studies (3)
Development of Social Studies 		
instructional Materials (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course: Choose One of the
following).
ELC421
Global Perspective & Materials in Social
Studies (3)
ELC441
Social Studies and Affirmative Actions (3)
Double major: Special Education and Science (PRESERVICE)
FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION
CORE Courses:
EFS400

SECOND MAJOR: PRIMARY EDUCATION SUBJECT
CONCENTRATION
Take 1, 2, 3, or 4

EFS402

49

Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in SPED (3)
Strategies for Helping Families of 		

Students with Learning Disabilities/		
Difficulties (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course (Choose One of the following):
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Students with ADHD (3)
Second Major: MATHS OR SCIENCE
Choose TWO of the following within one’s area.
ESE412
Introduction to Web Design, 		
Development & Publishing for Teachers
(2 credits)
ESE442
ICT and e-Learning (2 credits)
ESM412 Mathematics and Society (2)
ESM442 ICT in Mathematics Education (II) (2)
ESS412
Introduction to the History and 		
Philosophy of Science (2)
ESS442
Further Issues in ICT for the Science
Teacher (2)
AREAS OF CONCENTRATION (Continue with the
Teaching Subject passed in level 300)
Biology (Choose TWO)
BIO416
Immunology (3 credits)
[Pre-requisite: Pass BIO216]
BIO423
Exercise Physiology (3)
BIO424
Vertebrate Structure (3)
BIO430
Post-Harvest Physiology (3)
BIO311
Plant Systematics (3)
BIO418
Food Microbiology (3)
BIO434
Plant Ecology (3 credits) [Pre-requisite:
Pass BIO 215]
Chemistry (Choose TWO)
CHE412
Sample handling and biochemical 		
analysis (3) [Pre-requisite Pass CHE311/312]
CHE432 Secondary metabolites and 		
biomolecules (3) [Pre-requisite:
Pass CHE331]
CHE442 Advanced physical chemistry (II) (3)
[Pre-requisite: Pass CHE341]
Mathematics (Choose TWO)
MAT402 History of Mathematics (3) 		
[Pre-requisite:D grade or above in MAT 122]
MAT412 Number Theory (3) 			
[Pre-requisite: D grade or above 		
in MAT311]
MAT416 Abstract Algebra III (3) [Pre-requisite: D
grade or above in MA311]
MAT426 Partial Differential Equations (3) [Prerequisite: Pass MAT 423]
Physics (Take all)
PHY481
Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics (3)
PHY482 Statistical Mechanics II [ pre-reqt. PHY
472](3)
PHY483 Advanced Solid State Physics [Pre-reqt.
473; Co-reqt 482](3)
PHY489 Physics Practicals 8.1 [Pre-requisite: Pass
PHY359
and 369] (2)
Double Major: Special Education and Science
SECONDARY IN-SERVICE
FIRST MAJOR: SPECIAL EDUCATION
CORE Courses: (9)
EFS400
Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in SPED (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with Disabilities (3)

Plus OPTIONAL Course (Choose One of the following):
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students 		
with Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Students with ADHD (3)

Assessment
Performance in each course shall be assessed by
a combination of coursework and two hour final
examination in the ratio 1:1, unless otherwise stated in
the Course Description.

Second Major: MATHS OR SCIENCE (8 credits)
A. EDUCATION (Any Two)
ESM412 Mathematics & Society (2)
ESM442 Info.& Communication Technology in
Maths Education II (2)
ESS412
Introd.to the History & Philosophy of
Science (2)
ESS442
Info.& Communication Technology in
Science Education II (2)
B. AREAS OF CONCENTRATION
(Continue with the Teaching Subject selected in
Semester 1)
1. Biology (Any TWO of)
BIO306
Developmental biology (3)
BIO311
Plant Systematics (3)
BIO314
Conservation Biology (3)
2. Chemistry (Take all)
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2 s)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
3. Mathematics
MAT324 Differential Equations (3)
Plus ONE of
MAT402 History of Mathematics (3)
MAT482 Geometry for Teachers (3)
MAT484 Introduction to Probability & Statistics for
Teachers (3)
4. Physics (Take all)
PHY361
Introduction to Electromagnetism [Prereqt. PHY 241] (3)
PHY362 Analytical Thermodynamics 		
[Pre-reqt. PHY 232] (3)		
PHY369 Physics Practicals 6.1 (2)
Special Education and Social Studies
CORE Courses:
EFS400
Project: Contemporary Issues and 		
Concerns in SPED (3)
EFS402
Strategies for Helping Families of 		
Students with Learning Disabilities/		
Difficulties (3)
Plus OPTIONAL Course (Choose One of the following):
EFS403
Speech Correction for Students with
Communication Disorders (3)
EFS404
Education of Students with ADHD (3)
Second Major (Social Studies)
ELC411
Curriculum development for Social
Studies Teachers (3)
ELC404
Development of Social Studios 		
Instructional Materials (3)
Optional Courses (take One)
ELC441
Social Studies and Affirmative Action (3)
ELC421
Global Perspective and Material in Social
Studies (3)
NB. Please note that some courses may change in that
case then contact the respective department concerned
for appropriate courses.

50

Award Of Diploma and Degree
Subject to General Regulation 00.852:
To be awarded the Diploma in Special Education a
student must complete a minimum of 72 credits; to be
awarded the B.Ed (Special Education), a student must
complete a minimum of 144 credits.

BACHELOR OF EDUCATION
DEGREE IN COUNSELLING (BED.
COUNSELLING)
ii) Entrance requirements
a) At least five credits in any Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE) or its
equivalent. These subjects should include credit in
English Language and a pass in Mathematics.
b) An acceptable Diploma or equivalent in Adult
Education, Home- Economics, Nursing, Physical Health
and Recreation, Primary Education or Secondary
Education, Social Work or Theology,or any other
relevant field. Holders of Diploma qualifications who
have equivalent foundation courses in Counselling
will gain credit exemptions for equivalent courses
completed at College level. Entrants who gain sufficient
credit exemptions may enter with advanced standing
and enrol direct in Levels 200 or 300. Credit exemptions
will be considered on a case-by case basis. Relevant
work experience shall be an added advantage.
c) Holders of a Certificate in Education plus BGCSE/
COSC grades or equivalent not meeting ii (a) above
but who have at least two years appropriate work
experience may be admitted under the Mature Age
Entry Scheme. Applicants admitted through this scheme
shall be interviewed.
d) To determine the numbers who take the Major/Major,
there will be screening and interviews. The screening
will include BGCSE grade equivalents of credit in
English and pass in Mathematics, passing core courses
in counselling at levels 100 and 200 a minimum GPA
of 3.0, a personal interview in which the academic
background, educational and professional goals,
experience, personal and emotional stability of each
candidate are evaluated before admission is granted.
Major/Minor – BEd. Counselling
Major/Minor Courses
Student in the Major/Minor will take the
following courses.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
EFH100
Foundations of Guidance and 		
Counselling (3)
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology
(3)
Elective Course (3)
Students shall select 1 elective course, not
already taken.
General Education Courses (5)
COM161 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)
ICT121
Computing and Information 		
SkillsFundamentals1 (2)

Semester 2
Core Courses
EFH102
Indigenous Guidance and Counselling
Approaches (3)
EFH103
Introduction to Career Development (3)
EFH104
Helping Relationship Skills (3) Elective
Course (3 credits)
Students shall select 1 elective course, not already
taken.
General Education Course (5)
COM162
ICT122

Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education) (3)
Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals II (2)

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
EFH201
Counselling over the Lifespan (3)
EFH202
Theories and Techniques of Counselling (3)
Elective Course (3)
Students shall select 1 elective course, not
already taken.
Semester 4
Core Courses
EFH200
Group Work in Counselling (3)
EFH204
Ethical & Legal Issues in Counselling (3)
EFR220
Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Elective Course (3 credits)
Students shall select 1 elective course, not
already taken.
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
EFH300
Appraisal Techniques in Counselling (3)
EFH302
Community Counselling (3)
EFH303
Multicultural Counselling (3)
EFH220
Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Elective Course (3 credits). Students shall select 1
elective course, not already taken.
Semester 6
Core Courses
EFH304
HIV/AIDS Counselling (3)
EFH305
Teaching of Guidance & Counselling in
Schools & Other Settings (3)
EFH307
Practicum in Guidance and Counselling
(Classroom/field work practice) (3)
Optional Courses (Choose One):
EFF220
Historical, Philosophical and Sociological
Foundations of Education (3)
EFH203
Occupational Counselling (3)
EFP200
Human Learning, Cognition and 		
Motivation (3)
EFH308
Family and Marriage Counselling (3)
Elective Course (2 credits)
Students shall select 1 elective course, not
already taken.
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
EFH400
Substance Abuse Counselling (3)
EFH401
Research Project in Counselling (3)
Optional Course (Choose one):
EFH309
Human Sexuality & Counselling (3)
EFH410
Seminars in Counselling (3)

EFH405
Spiritual Counselling (3)
Elective Course (3)
Students shall select 1 elective course, not
already taken.
Semester 8
Core Courses
EFH407
Consultation in Schools & Community
Settings (3)
EFH408
Internship in Guidance and Counselling
(Field Work) (6)
EFH409
Development & Management of 		
Guidance & Counselling School 		
Programs (3)
Major/Major – BEd Counselling
Major/Major
The proposed program can be taken by any student
from any program; the duration is 8 semesters. It
shall comprise CHS core, optional, elective and general
education courses. Students shall meet normal elective
and general education requirements stipulated for
bachelor’s degrees. In the Major/Major students shall
take a minimum of 57 credits in Counselling core, and 6
optional as listed below.

LEVEL 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
EFH400
Substance Abuse Counselling (3)
EFH401
Research Project in Counselling (3)
Optional Course (Choose one)
EFH405
Spiritual Counselling (3)
EFH410
Seminars in Counselling (3)
Semester 8
Core Courses
EFH407
Consultation in Schools & Community
Settings (3)
EFH408
Internship in Guidance and Counselling
(6)
EFH409
Development & Management of 		
Guidance & Counselling School 		
Programmes (3)
Assessment
1. C.A. Normally should comprise at least three
pieces of work (examples are, written assignment, test,
presentations, project and reports) Or
2. CA Normally should comprise at least two pieces of
work, and a final examination in the ratio of 1:1

MAJOR/MAJOR
Students in Major/Major will take the following
courses being for the counselling major:

POST GRADUATE DIPLOMA IN
EDUCATION

LEVEL 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
EFH100
Foundations of Guidance and 		
Counselling (3)

Entrance Qualifications
The normal entry requirements into the Post Graduate
Diploma in Education (PGDE) Programme shall be in
accordance with the General regulations 30.20

Semester 2
Core Courses
EFH102
Indigenous Guidance and Counselling
Approaches (2)
EFH103
Introduction to Career Development (3)
EFH104
Helping Relationship Skills (3)
LEVEL 200
Semester
Core Courses
EFH201
Counselling over the Lifespan (3)
EFH202
Theories and Techniques of
Counselling (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
EFH200
Group Work in Counselling (3)
EFH204
Ethical and legal issues in Counselling (2)
LEVEL 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
EFH300
Appraisal Techniques in Counselling (3)
EFH302
Community Counselling (3)
EFH303
Multicultural Counselling (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
EFH304
HIV/AIDS Counselling (3)
EFH305
Teaching of Guidance & Counselling in
Schools & Other Settings (3)
EFH307
Practicum in Guidance and Counselling
(Classroom/fieldwork) (3)
Optional Courses (Choose one):
EFH308
Family and Marriage Counselling (3)
EFH309
Human Sexuality & Counselling (3)

51

Programme Structure
The Post Graduate Diploma in Education (PGDE) shall
normally be a one year full-time programme. The
minimum number of credits to graduate is 31 made of
core courses of 2 to 3 credits. All students shall take
8 courses from Educational Foundations Department
and the remaining four from one of the respective
departments of LSSE/DMSE/HE according to the area
of specialization of student. Thus the Post Graduate
Diploma in Education (PGDE) shall compromise 12 core
courses and an additional compulsory winter course of
Teaching Practice worth 3 credits.
Students shall take the following core courses:
(i) Take in semester one
EFP500: Psychology of Learning (3)
(semesters 1 and 2)
EFC500:
Curriculum and Instruction (3)
EFH500: Guidance and Counseling (3)
(ii)Take in Semester two
EFF573:
EFR 500:
EFA500:
EFC510:
EFS500:

The Teacher, School and Society (2)
(semesters 1 and 2
Measurement and Evaluation (3)
School Organization and Management (3)
Contemporary Issues in Education (2)
Special Education - 3 credits semesters
1 and 2 And any one of the following
options (A to E):

A.Students intending to be Language and Social Science
Teachers
(i)Take in Semester one any two of
ELL501:
Language and Education Issues (3)
ELR501: Theory and Practice of Religious 		

ELG501:
ELH501:
ELF50I:

Education (3)
The Theory and Practice of Teaching
Geography (3)
Theory of Teaching History (3)
Theory of Teaching French 2 credits
(ii)Take in Semester Two

Two courses corresponding to those taken in semester
one in (i) above)
ELL502:
Practical Approaches to the Teaching of
English Language and Literature (3)
ELL504:
Practical Approaches to the Teaching of
Setswana (3)
ELR502: Theory and Practice of Religious 		
Education (3)
ELG502: The Theory and Practice of Teaching
Geography (3)
ELH502: Practice of Teaching History (3)
ELF502:
Practice of Teaching French (3)
B. Students intending to be Family and consumer
sciences Teachers
(i) Take in Semester one
FCS 511: Fundamental s of Teaching Home 		
Economics in Secondary Schools (3)
FCS512: Methods of Teaching and Evaluation in
Family and consumer sciences (3)
(ii) Take in Semester two
FCS513: Management of Family and consumer
sciences Instruction (3)
FCS514: Methods of Teaching and Evaluation in
Family and consumer sciences (3)
C. Students intending to be Computer Studies Teachers
shall
(i) Take in Semester One
ESE561: Introduction to Theory of Teaching 		
Computer Studies(3)
ESE591: Guided Study in Computer Education (3)
(ii) Take in Semester Two
ESE562: The Practice of Teaching Computer
Studies (3)
ESE572: Secondary School Computer Studies
Teaching (3)
D. Students intending to be Mathematics Teachers shall
(i)Take in Semester One
ESM561: Introduction to Theory of Teaching 		
Mathematics (3)
ESM591: Guided Study in Mathematics Education (3)
(ii)Take in Semester Two
ESM562: The Practice of Teaching Mathematics (3)
ESM572: Secondary School Mathematics 		
Teaching (3)
E. Students intending to be Science teachers shall
(i) Take in Semester One
ESS561:
Introduction to Theory of Teaching
Secondary School Science (3)
ESS591: Guided Study in Science Education (3)
(ii)Take in Semester Two
ESE562: The Practice of Teaching Secondary
School Science (3)

ESC572

Issues in Secondary School Chemistry
Teaching (3)
ESP572
Secondary School Physics Teaching (3)
Winter Course
ETP300
Teaching Practice (3)
Assessment
All courses will be assessed by means of Continuous
Assessment (CA) and final examination. Students shall
be encouraged to visit schools and produce reports
based on their observations and practical applications
of the theoretical approaches they will have been
provided with e.g. evaluation of curricula in practice or
writing a report on a school’s Guidance and counselling
programme.
Progression from Semester to Semester
Shall be in accordance with the Provision of General
Regulation 00.9
Award of the Diploma
The Diploma shall be awarded in accordance with the
General Regulations 10.4 subject to:
a) Completing a minimum of 31 credits
b)Completion of seven weeks of Teaching Practice
which has t to be passed. The final mark of T.P. will be
part of the overall grade.

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATIONAL
TECHNOLOGY
Semester 1
EDT543
Planning and Producing Instructional
Materials (3)
EDT411
Educational Technology Basics (3)
Semester 2
EDT310
Producing Instructional Materials for
Primary Education (3)
EDT543
Planning and Producing Instructional
Materials (3)

DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY AND
CONSUMER SCIENCES
Bachelor of Family and Consumer Sciences Degree
Programme

Entry Requirements
In addition to satisfying the requirements of General
Regulations 20.21, candidates shall be required to have
a credit in Biology, and/or Chemistry, or related Science
Combination at Ordinary Level or its equivalent, and a
minimum of grade D in English Language. A pass in any
Family and Consumer Sciences (FCS) subject shall be an
added advantage.
Alternative Entrance Qualifications
Applicants with a Diploma in Family and Consumer
Sciences (or Family and Consumer Sciences Education)
or Diploma in Secondary Education with FCS (Family
and Consumer Sciences) as a teaching subject shall
be admitted into Level 200 or 300 of the Degree
Programme based on accumulated credits in the area.

BIO122
CHE107
ICT121
COM161

Semester 2
Core Courses
FCS102
Introductory Nutrition (3)
(Pre-requisite BIO 122, 123, CHE 107)
FCS103
Prenatal and Early Childhood 		
Development (3)
BIO123
Introduction to Microbiology and Stored
Product Entomology (3)
PH162
Physics Applied to Family & Consumer
Sciences (3)
COM162 Academic and Professional Communication
(Education) (3)
ICT122
Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals II (3)
LEVEL 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
FCS204
Introductory Housing (3)
FCS205
Introduction to Textiles (3)
(Pre-requisite CHE 107)
FCS206
Fundamentals of Food Science (3)
(Pre-requisite BIO 122, 123, CHE 107, PHY
162)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals (DSE only) (3)
COM161 Communication and Academic Literacy
or Elective* (3) (DSE only)
EFS101
Introductory to Exceptional Children (3)
*Elective courses are to be chosen from any other
course outside of the FCS programme for which
students are eligible.
B. Area of Specialization (Choose from 1 OR 2)
1. Extension Specialisation
FCS208
Foundations of FCS Extension (3)
2. Formal Education Specialization
FCS207
Orientation to Teaching FCS (3)
Semester 2
A. Core Courses
FCS209
Technology and Creative Sewing (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 205)
FCS210
Foundations of Food Preparation (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 206)
FCS211
Introduction to Interior Design (3)
Elective (3)
Elective courses are to be chosen from any other course
outside of the FCS programme for which students are
eligible.
ICT122
PHY162
BIO123

LEVEL 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
FCS100
Introduction to FCS (3)
FCS101
Foundations of Family Studies (3)

Plus one of:
ESB572: Teaching the Secondary School Biology
Syllabus (3)

52

(Pre-requisite BIO 122, 123, CHE 107)
Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry (3)
Chemistry Applied to Family and Consumer
Sciences (3)
Computing & Information Skills 		
Fundamental I (3)
Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)

Computing and Information Skills 		
Fundamentals (DSE only) (3)
Physics Applied to FCS (DSE only) (3)
Introduction to Microbiology & Stored
Product Entomology (DSE only) (3)

B. Area of Specialization (Choose from 1 OR 2)
1. Extension Specialisation
FCS212
Group Processes & Dynamics (3)

2. Formal Education Specialization
EFR200
Introduction to Measurement in Education
Programmes (3)
Elective courses are to be chosen from any other course
outside of the FCS programme for which students are
eligible.
LEVEL 300
Semester 1
A. Core courses (Take all)
FCS302
Consumer Education and Protection (3)
FCS303
Apparel Production Processes (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 205, 209)
FCS304
Meal Management (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 102, 206)
FCS305
Social Cultural & Psychological Aspects
of Clothing (3)
B. Optional courses (Choose 1)
FCS306
Food Service Management (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 210)
FCS352
Theory and Practice when Interacting
with Young Children (3)
C. Area of Specialization (Choose from 1 OR 2)
1. Extension Specialisation
FCS301
Methods of Teaching FCS Extension (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 208)
2. Formal Education Specialization
EFC300 Introduction to Curriculum Development (3)
Semester 2
A. Core courses (Take All)
FCS211
Introduction to Interior Design (DSE
only) (3)
FCS309
Research Methods in FCS (3)
FCS310
Nutrition in the Lifespan (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 102)
FCS311
Apparel Product Design Development
(3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 205, 209, 303)
B. Optional course
EFH308
Family and Marriage Counselling (3) OR
Elective* (3)
*Elective courses are to be chosen from any other course
outside of the FCS programme for which students are
eligible.
C. Area of Professional Specialisation (Choose one, from
1-2)
1. Formal Education Specialization (Take All)
FCS307
FCS Instruction in Secondary Schools (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 207, EFR 220)
ETP300

Teaching Practice (winter course) (3)

2. Extension Specialization (Take All)
FCS308
Programme Planning in FCS Extension (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 208)
FCS312
Field Attachment (winter course) (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 301)
LEVEL 400
Semester 1
A. Core courses
FCS404
Community Nutrition (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 102)
MGT202 Small Business Management (3)

FCS407
FCS408

Human Development Seminar (3)
Fashion, Culture and Society (3)

C. Area of Specialisation (Choose one, from 1-2)
1. Extension Specialization
FCS402 Management of FCS Extension Programmes (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 208, 308)
2. Formal Education Specialization
FCS401
Management & Administration of FCS
Programmes (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 307, EFC 200, ETP 300)
Semester 2
A. Core courses
FCS403
Research Project in FCS (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 309)
Elective (3)
B. Optional courses (select 3)
FCS409
Management of Family Resources (3)
FCS410
Therapeutic Nutrition (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 102, 310)
FCS411
Community Mobilization (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 208, 212)
FCS412
Principles of Quantity Food Production
(3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 210, 304, 306)
FCS413
Food Regulations (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 206)
FCS415
Tailoring Techniques (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 405)
Assessment
Student’s performance in each course shall be assessed
in accordance with the provision of the University
General Regulations 00.8. Courses offered in other
faculties/departments shall be governed by their
relevant regulations
.
Progression from semester to semester
Progression from semester to semester shall be in
accordance with provisions of the University General
Regulation 00.9.
Degree
Award of Degree shall be in accordance with provision
of the University General Regulations 00.85, subject to
completion of 6 credits of Teaching Practice (School
Specialization) or 6 credits of Internship.

DEPARTMENT OF LANGUAGES
AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
EDUCATION
Programmes
Bachelor of Education
(Secondary) Humanities
Bachelor of Education (Secondary)
Postgraduate Diploma in Education
Entry Requirements
The normal Entry Requirements shall be as stipulated
in the University of Botswana General Regulations
– Entrance Qualifications 20.20, and Departmental
Regulation E.D. 26. 10 and ED. 26.12.

B. Optional courses (select 2)
FCS405
Apparel Manufacturing (3)
(Pre-requisite FCS 311)
FCS406
Housing in Community Development (3)

53

Bed (Secondary): Humanities Specialisation
Semester 5
Level 3
African Languages and Literature
ALL321
The Structure of the Sentence (3)
ALL322
The Structure of Meaning (3)
ALL341
Introduction to Literary Theory (3)
English
ENG311
Modern English Grammar (3)
ENG317 African Drama (3)
ENG373 Botswana Literature (3)
English Language and Literature Curriculum Course
ELL 290
Language Education Issues
ELL301
Curriculum and policy issues in language
education (3)
Environmental Education
EEL301
Introduction to Environmental 		
Education (3)
History and Geography Education
SEMESTER: 1
History and Geography Education
CORE COURSE
ICT121 Computing and Information Skills 1 (3)
1.HISTORY (Core courses)
ELH290
Theory of Teaching History in Schools (3)
HIS102
Introduction to the Study of History (2)
HIS201
African Cultures and Civilisations to
c.1500 (3)
HIS202
Africa in the Era of the Atlantic Slave Trade
c.1500-c1800(3)
Select any two of the following:
ELC211
Introduction to Development Issues and
Perspectives (3)
ELC300
Education for Self-Reliance (3)
ELC302
Gender Issues in Social Studies (3)
2. GEOGRAPHY (Core courses)
ELG290
Theory of Geography Teaching (3)
ENS211
The Earth Environmental Education (3)
ENS251
The Human Environment System (3)
ENS242
Introduction to Spatial Analysis (3)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (3)
Moral Education Curriculum Courses
ELM301 Theory of Moral Education (3)
ELM290 Theory of Teaching Moral Education
ELR 301 Theory of Religious Education
Religious Education Courses
ELR301
Theory of Religious Education (3)
ELR 290 Theory of Teaching Religious Education
ELR 301 Theory of Religious Education
Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL 290
Language Education Issues
ELL301
Curriculum and policy issues in 		
language education (3)
Social Studies
ELC300
Education for Self-reliance (3)
ELC302
Gender issues in Social Studies (3)
Theology and Religious Studies
TRS301
Christology (3)
TRS302
Missionaries in the 19th Century South
Africa (3)

Environmental Education (Core/Compulsory Course)
EEL302 Environmental Education Methodology (3)

ALL354
ALL355

Semester 6
Level 3
African Languages and Literature
ALL323
Introduction to Stylistics and Discourse
Analysis (3)
ALL342
African Oral Narratives (3)
ALL343
Introduction to African Popular Theatre
(3)

English
ENG312
ENG343
ENG324

Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELE291
The Teaching of English Language &
Literature at Secondary School
ELS291
The Teaching of Setswana at Secondary
School
ELL302
The teaching of Literature at Secondary
School l (3)

Environmental Education
CORE (Compulsory)
EEL301 Introduction to Environmental Education (3)

Environmental Education
EEL302
Environmental Education Methodology
(3)

Theology and Religious Studies
TRS317
Theodicy: The Co-existence of God and
Evil (3)
TRS318
Beginning Biblical Hebrew II (3)
TRS319
Philosophy of Religion (3)
TRS320
Theories of Truth (3)
TRS321
Metaphysics III (3)
TRS322
History of Christianity in Southern Africa
(3)
TRS325
Foundational Structures of Islam (3)
ELR291
Practice of Teaching Religious Education
ELR301
Theory of Teaching Religious Education
TRS303
Creation and the Bible (2)

History and Geography Education
CORE COURSE
ICT122
Computing and Information Skills 		
fundamentals II (3)
AREAS OF CONCENTRATION
1. HISTORY (Core courses)
ELH291
Theory of Teaching History in Schools (3)
ELP490
Research Methods in LSSE (3)
HIS331
African Diaspora in the Islamic World &
Asia (3)
HIS335
Colonial Latin America to 1830 (3)
HIS 343
Trade & Politics in Central African 		
Kingdoms (3)
Select one from the following:
ELC311 Multicultural Education (3)
ELC312 Conflicts and Conflict Resolution (3)
2. GEOGRAPHY (Core Courses)
ELG291
Practice of Geography Teaching (Pre-req
ELG290) (3)
ELC211
Introduction to Development Issues and
Perspectives (3)
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
ENS318
Water Resources Development and
Management (3)
Language and Curriculum Courses
ELL302
The Teaching of Literature at Secondary
School (3)
Social Studies
ELC311
Multicultural Education (3)
ELC312
Conflicts and Conflicts Resolutions (3)
Theology and Religious Studies
TRS314
Christian Moral Theology (3)
TRS315
Sociology of Religion (3)
Optional Course for Semester 6
One course (2-3 credits) to be selected from the menu
below.
African Languages and Literature
ALL332
Language Instruction V (3)
ALL351
Politics and Southern African Poetry (3)
ALL352
Emergent Literary Genres (3)
ALL341
Epic Performance in Africa (3)
ALL334
Introduction to Modern Theories in
Grammatical Analysis (3)
ALL335
Language Instruction VI (3)

ENG327
ENG321
ENG341

African Oral Literature and the Media (3)
The Contemporary Setswana Novel (3)

Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL401
Foundations of Multicultural Literacy
Education (3)

Milton (3)
Modern African Poetry (3)
Twentieth Century American Literature
(3)
Practical Drama (3)
Usage in English (3)
Introduction to Socio-linguistic (3)

Social Studies
ELC401
Socialisation Issues (3)
ELC403
Economic Cooperation & Integration (3)

Social Studies
ELC321
Social Studies Methods (3)
ELC322
Evaluation in Social Studies (3)

Moral Education Curriculum Courses
ELM291 Practice of Teaching Moral Education
ELM 301 Theory of Teaching Moral Education
Religious Education Curriculum Courses
ELR 291 Practice of Teaching Religious Education
ELR 301 Theory of Teaching Religious Education
Semester 7
Level 4
Core courses
Research Project Courses
ELP490
Research Methodology in Languages
and Social Sciences Education (3)
African Languages and Literature
ALL421
Introduction to Historical and
Comparative Linguistics based in Africa
(3)
ALL422
A Socio-linguistic Study of Southern
Africa (3)
ALL441
World Literature in Setswana Translation
(3)
English
ENG421
ENG441
English
ELL401

Approaches to Syntax (3)
Introduction to Pragmatics (3)
Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
Foundations of Multicultural Literacy
Education (3)

Moral Education Curriculum Courses
ELM401 Teaching Moral Education in Secondary
Schools (3)
Religious Education Curriculum Courses
ELR401
Teaching Religious Education in 		
Secondary Schools (3)

54

Theology and Religious Studies
TRS401
New Religious Movements (3)
TRS402
Religion and Politics (3)
Optional Courses for Semester 7
One course (2-3 credits) to be selected from the menu
below.
African Languages and Literature
ALL431
Introduction to Psycho-linguistics (3)
ALL432
Language Instruction VII (3)
ALL451
Studies in African Aesthetics (3)
ALL452
Popular Culture in Africa (3)
ALL453
Women’s Literature in Botswana (3)
English
ENG412
ENG413
ENG471

Introduction to Shakespeare (3)
The African Novel I (3)
Introduction to Literary Stylistics (3)

Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL403
Literacy, education, culture (3)
ELL404
Reader- response Theories in the 		
Secondary School Classroom (3)
Environmental Education
EEL401
Environmental Conservation (3)
Moral Education Curriculum Courses
ELM492 Evaluation of Moral Education 		
Curriculum in Botswana Secondary
Schools (3)
ELM493 Contemporary Moral Issues in Moral
Education (3)
Religious Education Curriculum Courses
ELR492
Evaluation of Religious Education 		
Curriculum in Botswana Secondary
Schools (3)
ELR493
History of Religious Education in 		
Botswana (3)
Language and Literature
Curriculum Courses
ELL403
Literacy, education, culture (3)
ELL404
Reader-response Theories in the 		
Secondary School Classroom (3)
Social Studies
ELC421
Global Perspectives and Materials in
Social Studies (3)
ELC431
Civic Education (3)
ELC451
Resource Management in Africa (3)
ELC461
Human Rights Issues (3)
Theology and Religious Studies
TRS403
The Doctrine of Sin in the Bible (3)
TRS405
Intermediate Hebrew I (3)
TRS406
Intermediate Arabic I (3)
TRS407
Islam’s Socio-cultural, legal and Political
Structure (3)
TRS409
African Christian Theologies (3)
TRS411
Politics and Development of
Biblical Thought (3)
TRS412
Ecumenical Theology (3)
TRS413
Hinduism (3)

HISTORY and GEOGRAPHY EDUCATION

TRS416

CORE (compulsory)
ELP 491
Research Project in LSSE (3)
Select any three (3) from the following:
HIS332
African Diaspora in the Carribean & the
Americas (3)
HIS336
Modern Latin America (3)
HIS341
From Slavery to Colonialism in West
Africa (3)
HIS342
Modern Anglophone, Francophone &
Lusophone West Africa (3)
HIS344
The Roots of Crisis in Modern Central
Africa (3)
HIS 441
Slave Trade & Colonial Conquest in in
East Africa (3)

Optional Courses for Semester 8
One course (2-3 credits) to be selected from the menu
below.

GEOGRAPHY
CORE
ELC403
Economic Cooperation and Integration
(3)
ENS311
Biogeography (3)
ENS315
Process of Geomorphology (3)
Select one from the following
ELC432
Skills in Map Interpretation (3)
ENS317
Principles of Hydrology (3)
ELC432
Skills in Map Interpretation (3)
ENS338
Introduction to Geomorphology (3)
Semester 8
Level 4
Core courses
Research project courses
ELP491
Research Project in Languages and
Social Sciences Education (3)
African Languages and Literature
ALL423
Bantu and Khoe-San Languages of 		
Southern Africa (3)
ALL442
Creative Writing, Theory and Practice (3)
ALL443
Oral Poetry in Botswana (2) English
ENG411
Form, Function and Variation in English
(3)
ENG431 Introduction to Discourse Analysis (3)
Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL402
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Literacy
Education (3)
Environmental Education
(CORE/Compulsory)
EEL402
Curriculum Development in 		
Environmental Education (3)
Moral Education Curriculum Courses
ELM402 Curriculum Design in Moral Education (3)
Religious Education Curriculum Courses
ELR402
Curriculum Design in Religious 		
Education (3)
Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL402
Interdisciplinary Approaches in Literacy
Education (3)
Social Studies
ELC411
Curriculum Development for Social
Studies Teachers (3)
ELC404
Development of Social Studies 		
Instructional Materials (3)
Theology and Religious Studies
TRS415
Twentieth Century Theologians (2)

Religion and Modernity (2)

African Languages and Literature
ALL434
Introduction to Applied Linguistics (3)
ALL435
Language Instruction VIII (3)
ALL454
Children’s Traditions and Dramatics (2)
ALL455
Postcolonial Theory and African 		
Literature (3)
English
ENG443
ENG451
ENG452
ENG462
ENG481

The African Novel II (3)
Introduction to Semantics (3)
Shakespeare Drama (3)
Shakespeare Poetry (3)
Language and Gender (3)

Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL405
Materials Development and Evaluation in
Language Education (3)
ELL406
Second/Foreign Language Research
and Its Implications for Language 		
Teaching and Learning (3)
Moral Education Curriculum Courses
ELM494 Moral Education Departments and Units
(3)
Religious Education Curriculum Courses
ELR494
Role of Religious Education 		
Departments (3)
Language and Literature Curriculum Courses
ELL405
Materials Development and Evaluation
in Language Education (3)
ELL406
Second/Foreign Language Research and
Its Implications for Language Teaching
and Learning (3)
Social Studies
ELC422
Social Studies Teacher Preparation (3)
ELC432
Skills in Map Interpretation (3)
ELC441
Social Studies and Affirmative
Action
(3)
ELC442
Values Education (3)
ELC462
Social Studies Classroom Environment
(3)
Theology and Religious Studies
TRS417
Paul’s Epistles (2)
TRS418
Contemporary African Philosophy (2)
TRS419
Intermediate Hebrew I (2)
TRS421
History of Christianity: Modern and
Contemporary (2)
TRS422
Empiricism (2)
TRS423
History of Philosophy IV (2)
TRS424
Buddhism (2)
TRS425
The Theology of the Reformation (2)
TRS426
Religions Rituals and Sacred Places (2)
TRS428
Religious Pluralism (2)
HISTORY and GEOGRAPHY EDUCATION
CORE (compulsory):
HIS 416
Land, labour and liberation in 		
Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe (3)
HIS442
Ecology and Empire, Conservation and
Politics in Eastern Africa (3)
HIS446
Growth, Policy and Poverty in Africa,
Latin America, South and South-East
Asia (3)
HIS 401
Mfecane & the Settler Scramble for
Southern Africa (3)
Select any two (2) of the following:
ELC 403 Economic Cooperation and Integration (3)

55

ELC 451
ELC 461

Resource Management in Africa (3)
Human Rights Issues (3)

1.GEOGRAPHY
CORE (Compulsory)
EEL 402
Curriculum Development in 		
Environmental education (3)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (3)
ENS260
Environment and Population 		
dynamics(3)
Select any two from the following
ENS312
Range Ecology (3)
ENS353
Concepts and Principles of 		
Industrialisation (3)
ENS403
Environmental Hazards and Disaster
Management (3)
Bachelor of Education (Business)
Level 100:
Semester 1
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics, Core (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management, Core (3)
STA101
Maths for Business & Social Sciences 1,
Core (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics, Core (4)
COM161 Communication & Academic Literacy
Skills (Education) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamental (2)
Level 100:
Semester 2
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting, Core (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics, Core (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing, Core (3)
STA102
Maths for Business & Social Sciences II,
Core (3)
COM162 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Education) (3)
ICT122
Computing & Information Skills 2, GEC (2)
Level 200:
Semester 3
ELB201
Introduction to Business Education, Core (3)
FIN200
Business Finance, Core, 3
EFP100
Introduction to
Educational Psychology, Core (3)
EFC300
Introduction to Curriculum 		
Development, Core (3)
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting, Core (3)
Level 200:
Semester 4
Core (Compulsory)
ELB202
ACC205
ACC206
BIS205
MGT200
MKT100

Teaching & Learning Strategies in Business
Education (3)
Special Topics in Accounting (3)
Accounting for Manufacturing and
Alternative Entities (3)
Information Technology (3)
Organisational Design and 		
Development (3)
Principles of Marketing (3) [For in-service
students only]

Level 300:
Semester 5
[Marketing and Management Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELB301
MGT300
MKT303
EEL301

Practice of Business Education, Core (3)
Human Resource Management, (3)
Strategic Sales Management (3)
Introduction to Environmental 		
Education (3)

ELC300

Education and Self Reliance, Optional (3)
Plus one Elective (3)

Level 300: Semester 5 [Accounting and Finance
Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELB301
ACC311
FIN301
EEL301
ELC300

Practice of Business Education, Core (3)
Introduction to Company Accounts (3)
Financial Institutions and Markets I (3)
Introduction to Environmental 		
Education (3)
Education and Self Reliance, Optional (3)
Plus one Elective (3)

Level 300: Semester 6 [Marketing and Management
Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELB302
MKT314
MGT305
BIS304
EEL302

Learning Support Systems in Business
Education, Core (3)
Business to Business Marketing Practice (3)
Human Resource Development (3)
Management Information System, (3)
Environmental Education methodology
(3)

Level 300: Semester 6 [Accounting and Finance
Specialization] Core (Compulsory)
ELB302
Learning Support Systems in Business
Education (3)
ACC305 Taxation Principles (3)
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems (3)
FIN300
Financial management (3)
EEL302
Environmental Education methodology
(3)
Level 400: Semester 7 [Marketing and Management
Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELP490
Research Methods in LSSE (3)
ELB401
Critical Issues in Business Education (3)
MGT400
Strategic Management (3)
MKT409 Brand management (3)
Select one of the following:
ELC461
Human Rights Issues (3)
ELC400
Socialisation Issues (3)
Level 400: Semester 7 [Accounting and Finance
Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELP490
ELB401
ACC410
FIN400

Research Methods in LSSE (3)
Critical Issues in Business Education (3)
Financial reporting (3)
Financial Theory and Analysis (3)

Select one of the following:
ELC461
Human Rights Issues (3)
ELC400
Socialisation Issues (3)
Level 400: Semester 8 [Marketing and Management
Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELP491
MKT408
MKT412
MGE415

Research project in LSSE (3)
Contemporary Issues in marketing (3)
Managing Marketing Relationships (3)
Managing growing Enterprises (3)

Take BIS404 Small Business Information Systems,
Optional (3)
OR one Elective (3)
Level 400: Semester 8 [Accounting and Finance
Specialization]
Core (Compulsory)
ELP491
Research project in LSSE (3)
ACC408 Current Issues in accounting (3)
FIN304
Principles of Risk Management and
Insurance (3)
Select one of the following:
FIN302
Financial Planning and Forecasting,
Optional (3)
ELC441
Social studies and Affirmative Action,
Optional (3)
ACC409 Management Accounting, Optional (3)
Plus one Elective (3)
Assessment
Assessment shall be as per General Academic Regulation
00.8.
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from Semester to Semester shall be as per
General Regulations 00.9
Award of Degree
The award of the Degree shall be as per the General
Regulations 00.85

DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
AND SCIENCE EDUCATION
1.0 General Information
1.0.1 The Department of Mathematics and Science
Education offers courses to students in Degree and
Non-Degree Teacher Education Programmes in the
following teaching subjects:
• Biology
• Chemistry
• Physics
• Computer Studies
• Mathematics
1.2 Entrance Requirements
1.2.1 Admission into Level One of the Programme shall
be governed by General Regulation 20.2.
1.2.2 Minimum requirements are a BGCSE with a pass
in English Language and a C grade in Mathematics and
any two of Biology, Chemistry or Physics, or a minimum
of Grade BB in Double Science
Double Award
1.2.3 An applicant who has taken relevant Advanced
Level (A-Level) or equivalent examinations and who
has attained a minimum of one E and two Os in the
relevant subjects may be admitted into the Bachelor of
Education
Degree Programme in Science
1.2.4 If an applicant has Grade E or better at Advanced
Level, or equivalent qualifications in Science subjects,
he/she may, subject to the approval of the relevant
Head of Department and the approval of the Deputy
Dean, be awarded credits and exempted from equivalent
course(s) prescribed for the Degree Programme.
1.2.5 Bachelor of Science students of the University
with passes in at least two teaching subjects at Level
One may be admitted into Level Two of the Programme.
1.3 Programme Structure
1.4 Levels One and Two
Level One
Core Courses (6 Courses/26 credits)

56

Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4)
Plus: Two of the following courses:
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
Plus
ICT121S
Computer Skills Fundamental I (2)
COM141 Communication and Academic literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4)
plus: Two of the following courses:
BIO112
Diversity of Animals and Plants (4)
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4)
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism, and Elements of
Modern Physics (4)
Plus
ICT122S Computer Skills Fundamental II (2)
COM142 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Science) (3)
Level 200
Core Courses (6 to 10 Courses/16 to 20 credits)
Students shall select courses from any one of the
following teaching subjects: Biology; Computer Science;
Chemistry; mathematics and Physics.
Semester 3
Biology
BIO211
Cell Biology (3) Prerequisite BIO111,
BIO112
BIO214
Introduction to Mammalian Physiology
(3) Prerequisite BIO11, BIO112
BIO218
Biology of Flowering Plants (3) 		
Prerequisite BIO111, BIO112
Chemistry
CHE211
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry (2)
CHE213
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
CHE232 Structure and survey of Functional 		
Groups (2)
CHE234 Organic Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics1 (3)
Computer Science
CSI131
Discreet Structures I (3)
CSI141
Programming Principles (3)
CSI161
Introduction to Computing (3)
Mathematics
MAT211
Intro. Set and Number Theory (3)
MAT221 Calculus I (3)
Plus: one of the following courses:
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics (3)
MAT271 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics (3)
Physics
PHY231
PHY232
PHY239
MAT291

Mechanics, Vibrations and Waves, 		
Physical Optics (3)
Properties of Matter, Basic 		
Thermodynamics and Introduction to
Nuclear Physics (3)
Physics Practicals 3.1 (1)
Engineering Mathematics1 (3)

Semester 4
Biology
BIO212
Genetics (3) Prerequisite BIO111, BIO112
BIO213
Plant Structure and Function (3) 		
Prerequisite BIO111, BIO112
BIO216
General Microbiology (3) Prerequisite
BIO111, BIO112

Chemistry
CHE221
Atomic Structure, Bonding and Main
Group Chemistry (2)
CHE234 Organic Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
CHE242 Introductory Physical Chemistry (2)
CHE244 Physical Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
Computer Science
CIS123
Discreet Structures II (3) Prerequisite
CSI131
CSI142
Object-Oriented Programming (4) 		
Prerequisite CSI141
Mathematics
MAT212 Introductory Linear Algebra (3)
MAT222 Calculus II (3)
Plus: Two of the following courses:
MAT242 Computing I (3)
MAT252 Newtonian Mechanics (3)
Physics
PHY241
Advanced Electricity and Magnetism (3)
PHY242 Basic Electronics (3)
PHY249 Physics Practicals 4.1 (1)
Core Courses (5 Courses/15 credits)
Students shall select courses from the approved Faculty
of Education courses listed below:
Semester 3
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
Plus 0ne of the following courses based on teaching
subject:
ESB261: Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary School
Biology (3)
ESC261: Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary School
Chemistry (3)
ESE261
Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary
School Computer Studies (3)
ESM261 Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary
School Mathematics (3)
ESP 261: Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary School
Physics (3)
Semester 4
EFF220
Historical, Philosophical and Sociological
Foundations of Education (3)
Plus 0ne of the following courses based on teaching
subject:
ESB 262: Practicum in Secondary School Biology
Teaching (3)
ESC 262: Practicum in Secondary School Chemistry
Teaching (3)
ESE262
ESM262
ESP 262:

Practicum in Secondary School Computer
Studies Teaching (3)
Practicum in Secondary School 		
Mathematics Teaching (3)
Practicum in Secondary School Physics
Teaching (3)

General Education Courses (2 courses/6 credits)
Students shall choose GECs from the University-wide
menu.
Winter Course
ETP200
Teaching Practice I (3)
Level 300
1.5.1 Level Three Core Courses (6 to 9 courses/16 to 18
credits)
Courses for the Major teaching subject are to be
selected from approved Faculty of Science courses listed

below:
Semester 5
Biology
BIO307
Biochemistry (3) Prerequisite BIO211
BIO316
Plant Physiology (3) Prerequisite BIO213
BIO317
Comparative Vertebrate Physiology (3)
Prerequisite BIO214, BIO217
Chemistry
CHE321
Coordination Chemistry (2)
CHE323 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
CHE331
Structure and Survey of Functional Groups I
(3)
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamics and
Electrochemistry (2)
CHE343 Physical Chemistry Laboratory III (1)
Computer Science
CSI242
Data Structures (3) Prerequisites CSII32,
CSI142
CSI292
Information Systems Fundamentals (3)
Mathematics
MAT311
Abstract Algebra I (3)
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3) plus:
One of the following courses:
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics (3)
MAT323 Vector Calculus (3)
Physics
PHY351
PHY352
PHY359

Advanced Mechanics (3)
Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (3)
Physics Practicals 5.1 (2)

Semester 6
Biology
BIO215
Principles of Ecology (3) Prerequisite BIO111,
BIO112
BIO306
Developmental Biology (3) Prerequisite
BIO211, BIO217
BIO308
Molecular Biology (3) Prerequisite BIO212
Chemistry
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
CHE322 Group Theory and Organometallic 		
Chemistry (3)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
Computer Science
CSI223
Systems Programming Core (3) Prerequisite
CSI242
CSI251
Computer Architecture and Organisation (3)
Prerequisites CSI161,CSI141
CSI262
Database Concepts (3) Prerequisite CSI242
Mathematics
MAT324 Differential Equations (3)
Plus: Two of the following courses:
MAT312 Abstract Algebra II (3)
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3)
MAT342 Computing II (3)
MAT344 Numerical Methods of Linear Algebra (3)
MAT352 Dynamics I (3)
Physics
PHY361
PHY362
PHY369

Introduction to Electromagnetism (3)
Analytical Thermodynamics (3)
Physics Practicals6.1 (2)

57

Semester 5
Core Courses (5 Courses/14 credits)
In this semester, students shall also select courses from
the following list of Faculty of Education courses:
EFS101

Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)

plus: One of the following courses based on teaching
subject:
ESE361
Teaching Strategies for School Computer
Studies (3)
ESM361 Teaching Strategies for School Mathematics
(3)
ESB361
Teaching in the Contemporary Biology
Classroom (3)
ESC361
Introductory Pedagogical Content 		
Knowledge in School Chemistry (3)
ESP361
Pedagogic Strategies for School Physics (3)
Semester 6
ESR362
Introduction to Research Methods in
Mathematics and Science Education (2)
Students will choose one of the following
based on their teaching subject:
ESB362
Advanced Practicum in School Biology
Teaching (3)
ESC362
Advanced Practicum in School Chemistry
Teaching (3)
ESE362
Advanced Practicum in School Computer
Studies Teaching (3)
ESP362
Advanced Practicum in School Physics
Teaching (3)
ESM362 Advanced Practicum in School Mathematics
Teaching (3) and:
Semester 6
Students shall select one of the following based on their
teaching subject:
ESE372
Development and Evaluation of Computer
Studies Practical Work (2)
ESE392
Impact of Information and Communication
Technology on the Teaching/ Learning
Process (2)
ESM312 Philosophy and Psychology of Mathematics
Teaching (2)
ESM372 Mathematical Problem Solving (2)
ESS352
Human Impact on the Environment (2)
ESS372
Development and Evaluation of 		
Investigative Work in School Science (2)
General Education courses (1 course/3 credits)
Students shall choose GECs from the University-wide
menu.
Elective Course (1 course/2 credits)
Elective courses shall be chosen from any course offered
outside of the Department of Mathematics and Science
Education for which students are eligible.
Winter Course
ETP300
Teaching Practice II (3)
Optional Courses (1 course/2 credits)
Level 400
1.5.2 Level Four Core Courses (4 to 6 courses/12 credits)
Students shall select courses for their Major teaching
subject from the approved Faculty of Science courses
listed below:
Semester 7
Biology
BIO417
Biotechnology (3)
BIO427
Evolution (3) Prerequisite BIO212

Chemistry
Students shall select two of the following:
CHE421
Advanced Transition Metal Chemistry (3)
CHE431
Heterocyclic Chemistry, Synthetic Reactions
and Design of Organic Synthesis (3)
CHE441
Advanced Physical Chemistry I (3)

ESC 441: Introduction to ICT in Chemistry Teaching (2)
ESE441
Enrichment Topics in Computer Studies
Education (2)
ESM441 Introduction to ICT in Mathematics
Education (2)
ESP 441: Introduction to ICT in Physics Teaching (2)
Optional Courses (3 Courses/6 credits)

Computer Science
CSI354
Operating Systems (3) Prerequisites
CSI142,CSI251
CSI374
Computer Networks (3) Prerequisites
CSI142,CSI251
CSI342
Systems Analysis and Design (3) 		
Prerequisites CSI262
Mathematics
MAT421 Functions of a Complex Variable (3)
MAT423 Mathematical Methods (3)
Physics
PHY472 Statistical Mechanics I (3)
PHY473 Solid State Physics (3)
PHY479 Physics Practicals 7.1 (2)
Semester 8
Biology
BIO311
Plant Systematics (3)
BIO418
Food Microbiology (3) Prerequisite BIO216
Chemistry
Students shall select two of the following:
CHE412
Sample Handling and Biochemical Analysis
(3)
CHE432 Secondary Metabolites and Biomolecules (3)
CHE442 Advanced Physical Chemistry II (3)
Computer Science
Students shall select two of the following:
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3)
Prerequisites CSI262, CSI374
CSI384
Information Systems Theory and Practice (3)
Prerequisite CSI392
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3) 		
Prerequisite CSI342
Mathematics
Students shall select two of the following:
MAT402 History of Mathematics (3)
MAT412 Number Theory (3)
MAT416 Abstract Algebra III (3)
MAT426 Partial Differential Equations
Physics
PHY481
PHY485
PHY489

Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics (3)
Microcomputing for Physical Sciences (3)
Physics Practicals 8.1 (2)

Semester 7
Core Courses (2 Courses/5 credits)
Students shall choose one course from the approved
Faculty of Education courses listed below based on their
teaching subject:
ESE461
Advanced Teaching Methods in School
Computer Studies (3)
ESM461 Advanced Teaching Methods in School
Mathematics (3)
ESB461
Critical Debates in Biology Education (3)
ESC461
Further Issues in Chemistry Pedagogical
Content Knowledge (3)
ESP461
Advanced Pedagogic Strategies for School
Physics (3)
Plus one of the following courses:
ESB 441: Introduction to ICT in Biology Teaching (2)

Students shall choose one of the following based on
teaching subject:
ESE471
Contemporary Issues in Computer Studies
Education (2)
ESM471 Contemporary Issues in Mathematics
Education (2)
ESS471
Contemporary Issues in Science Education
(2)
ESR481
Research Project in Mathematics/ Science
Education (2)
Semester 8
Students shall choose two of the following based on
teaching subject:
ESB 442: Further Issues in ICT for the Biology Teacher
(2)
ESC 442: Further Issues in ICT for the Chemistry Teacher
(2)
ESE412
Introduction to Web Design, Development
and Publishing for Teachers (2)
ESE442
ICT and e-Learning (2)
ESM412 Mathematics and Society (2)
ESM442 Information and Communication 		
Technology in Mathematics Education II (2)
ESS412
Introduction to the History and Philosophy
of Science (2)
ESP 442: Further Issues in ICT for the Physics Teacher
(2)
Approved options from other DMSE courses Plus One of
EFC400
Curriculum Theory and Instruction (3)
EFF420
Contemporary Issues in Teacher Education
in Botswana (3)
General Education Courses (4 courses/9 credits)
Students shall select GECs from the University wide
menu.
Elective Course (1 course/2 credits)
One elective course is to be chosen from any course
offered outside the Department of Mathematics and
Science Education for which students are eligible.
1.6 Assessment
1.6.1 Courses offered by the Department of
Mathematics and Science Education shall normally
be assessed through continuous assessment (CA) and
final examination. Courses offered in other Faculties/
Departments shall be governed by their relevant
regulations.
1.6.2 Continuous assessment shall take a variety of
forms including written assignments, tests, practicals,
presentations and reports.
1.6.3 Continuous assessment shall normally comprise a
minimum of 3 pieces of assessed work. The components
of continuous assessment shall be equally weighted.
1.6.4 Courses which include a final examination in their
assessment shall be examined by a 2-hour paper.
1.6.5 The ratio of continuous assessment to final
examination shall be 1:1.
1.6.6 The overall grade in a course shall be in
accordance with the provisions of General Regulation
00.84.
1.7 Progression from Semester to Semester

58

Progression from semester to semester shall be in
accordance with the provisions of General Regulation
00.9.
1.8 Award of Degree
The Degree shall be awarded in accordance with the
provisions of General Regulation 00.85, subject to
completion of 6 credits of Teaching Practice.
2.0 Bachelor of Education in Secondary Education
(Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics)
For all Regulations governing the Bachelor of Education
Degree in Secondary Education, consult the Handbook
of the Department of Languages and Social Sciences
Education.
2.1 Level Two Core Courses (8 to 10 courses/24 to 29
credits)
Students shall select two teaching subjects from the
following subjects:
• Applied Mathematics
• Biology
• Chemistry
• Mathematics
• Physics
Level 200
Semester 3
Applied Mathematics
ESM201 INSET Introductory Mechanics I (3)
ESM214 INSET Introductory Computer Studies (3)
Biology
BIO111

Principles of Biology (4)

Chemistry
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
Mathematics
ESM203 INSET Algebra I (3)
ESM213 INSET Differential Calculus (3)
Physics
PHY112

Geometrical Optics and Mechanics 		
(4)

Ancillary Mathematics for the Sciences
ESM221 Pre-Calculus for Science Teachers (3)
Semester 4
Applied Mathematics
ESM204 INSET Introductory Mechanics II (3)
ESM211
INSET Introductory Mathematical Statistics
(3)
Biology
BIO112
Diversity of Animals and Plants (4)
Chemistry
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
Mathematics
ESM206 INSET Algebra II (3)
ESM216 INSET Integral Calculus (3)
Physics
PHY112

Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)

Ancillary Mathematics for the Sciences
ESM222 Calculus for Science Teachers (3)
On completion of Level Two, students will be at a level
equivalent to Level One of the Bachelor of Science
Programme in two of the following: BIO111/112;

CHE101/102; MAT111/112; PHY111/121.
General Education Courses (3 courses/7 credits)
Students shall select GECs from the University wide
menu.
Level 300
2.2 Level Three Core Courses (6 to 10 courses/16 to 20
credits)
Students shall select courses based on their predetermined teaching subjects from the approved
Faculty of Science courses listed below:
Semester 5
Applied Mathematics
MAT387 Mechanics for Teachers I (3)
MAT389 Linear Programming and Game Theory
for Teachers (3)
Biology
BIO211
Cell Biology (3) Prerequisite BIO111, BIO112
BIO214
Introduction to Mammalian Physiology (3)
Prerequisite BIO11, BIO112
BIO218
Biology of Flowering Plants (3) Prerequisite
BIO111, BIO112
Chemistry
CHE211
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry (2)
CHE213
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
CHE221
Atomic Structure, Bonding and Main Group
Chemistry (2)
CHE223 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
Mathematics
MAT381 Calculus for Teachers I (3)
MAT383 Linear Algebra for Teachers (3)
Physics
PHY231
PHY232
PHY239

Mechanics, Variations and Waves, Physical
Optics (3)
Properties of Matter, Basic Thermodynamics
and Introduction to Nuclear Physics
(4)
Physics Practicals 3.1 (1)

Semester 6
Applied Mathematics
MAT384 Computing for Teachers (3)
MAT388 Mechanics for Teachers II (3)
Biology
BIO212
BIO213
BIO216

Genetics (3) Prerequisite BIO111, BIO112
Plant Structure and Function (3) 		
Prerequisite BIO111, BIO112
General Microbiology (3) Prerequisite
BIO111, BIO112

ESS391

Mathematics I (3)
Principles and Practice of Teaching School
Science I (3)

Semester 6
ESR362
Introduction to Research Methods in
Mathematics and Science Education (2)
Students shall choose one course from the following
based on teaching subject:
ESM392 Principles and Practice of Teaching School
Mathematics II (3)
ESS392
Principles and Practice of Teaching School
Science II (3) plus:
Plus: Optional Courses (1 course/2 credits)
Semester 6
Students shall choose one course from the following
based on teaching subject:
ESM312 Philosophy and Psychology of Mathematics
Teaching (2)
ESM372 Mathematical Problem Solving (2)
ESS352
Human Impact on the Environment (2)
ESS372
Development and Evaluation of 		
Investigative Work in School Science (2)
General Education Courses (2 courses/4 credits)
Students shall choose GECs from the University-wide
menu.
Level 400
2.3 Level Four Core Courses (4 to 8 courses/12 credits)
Courses in each student’s Major teaching subject shall
be selected from the approved Faculty of Science
courses listed below.
Semester 7
Biology
BIO307
Biochemistry (3) Prerequisite BIO211
BIO317
Comparative Vertebrate Physiology (3)
Prerequisite BIO214, BIO217
BIO417
Biotechnology (3)
Chemistry
CHE321
Coordination Chemistry (2)
CHE323 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamic and
Electrochemistry (2)
CHE343 Physical Chemistry Laboratory III (1)
Mathematics
MAT483 Real Analysis for Teachers (3)
MAT485 Number Theory and Abstract Algebra for
Teachers (3)

Chemistry
CHE232 Structure and Survey of Functional Groups
I(2)
CHE234 Organic Chemistry Laboratory I (1)
CHE242 Introductory Physical Chemistry (2)
CHE244 Physical Chemistry Laboratory I (1)

Physics
PHY351
PHY352
PHY359

Mathematics
MAT382 Calculus for Teachers II (3)
MAT414 Combinatorics and Graph Theory (3)

Semester 8
Biology
BIO306
Developmental Biology (3)
BIO308
Molecular Biology (3) Prerequisite BIO212
BIO418
Food Microbiology (3) Prerequisite BIO216

Physics
PHY241
PHY242
PHY249

Advanced Electricity and Magnetism (3)
Basic Electronics (3)
Physics Practicals 4.1 (1)

Semester 5
Students shall choose one of the following:
ESM391 Principles and Practice of Teaching School

Advanced Mechanics (3)
Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (3)
Physics Practicals 5.1 (2)

Chemistry
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory II (1)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II(1)
Mathematics
MAT324 Differential Equations (3)

59

Plus: One of the following courses:
MAT482 Geometry for Teachers II (3)
MAT484 Introduction to Probability and Statistics
for Teachers (3)
Physics
PHY361
PHY362
PHY369

Introduction to Electromagnetism (3)
Analytical Thermodynamics (3)
Physics Practicals 6.1 (2)

Semester 7
Core Courses from Faculty of Education: (1 course/3
credits)
Students shall choose one of the following courses
based on teaching subject:
ESB461
ESC461

Critical Debates in Biology Education (3)
Further Issues in Chemistry Pedagogical
Content Knowledge (3)
ESM461 Advanced Teaching Methods in School
Mathematics (3)
ESP461
Advanced Pedagogic Strategies for School
Physics (3)
Optional Courses (3 courses/6 credits)
Students shall choose one of the following courses
based on teaching subject:
ESB 441: Introduction to ICT in Biology Teaching (2)
ESC 441: Introduction to ICT in Chemistry Teaching (2)
ESM441 Introduction to Information and 		
Communication Technology in Mathematics
Education (2)
ESM471 Contemporary Issues in Mathematics
Education (2)
ESP 441: Introduction to ICT in Physics Teaching (2)
ESS471
Contemporary Issues in Science Education
(2)
ESR481
Research Project in Mathematics/ Science
Education (2)
Semester 8
Students shall choose one of the following:
ESB 442: Further Issues in ICT for the Biology Teacher
(2)
ESC 442: Further Issues in ICT for the Chemistry
Teacher (2)
ESM412 Mathematics and Society (2)
ESM442 Information and Communication 		
Technology in Mathematics Education II (2)
ESS412
Introduction to the History and Philosophy
of Science (2)
ESP 442: Further Issues in ICT for the Physics Teacher (2
Plus: Choose one of the following optional courses
EFC 400 Curriculum Theory and Instruction (3)
EFF 420
Contemporary Issues in Teacher Education
in Botswana (3)
General Education Courses (2 Courses/6 credits)
Students shall select GECs from the University wide
menu.
Elective Courses (2 courses/6 credits)
Students shall select two electives from any courses
offered outside the Department of Mathematics and
Science Education for which they are eligible.
3.0 Post Graduate Diploma in Education
Computer Studies
Semester 1
ESE561
Introduction to Theory of Teaching 		
Computer Studies (3)

ESE591
Guided Study in Computer Education (3)
Semester 2
ESE562
The Practice of Teaching Computer Studies
(3)
ESE572
Secondary School Computer Studies
Teaching (3)
Mathematics
Semester 1
ESM561 Introduction to Theory of Teaching 		
Mathematics (3)
ESM591 Guided Study in Mathematics Education (3)
Semester 2
ESM562 The Practice of Teaching Mathematics (3)
ESM572 Secondary School Mathematics Teaching (3)
Science
Semester 1
ESB 561: Introduction to the Theory of Teaching
Secondary School Biology (3)
ESC 561: Introduction to the Theory of Teaching
Secondary School Chemistry (3)
ESP 561: Introduction to the Theory of Teaching
Secondary School Physics (3)
ESS591
Guided Study in Science Education (3)
Semester 2
ESB 562: The Practice of Teaching Secondary School
Biology (3)
ESC 562: The Practice of Teaching Secondary School
Chemistry (3)
ESP 562: The Practice of Teaching Secondary School
Physics (3)
plus one of the following based on science teaching
subject:
ESB572
Teaching the Secondary School Biology
Syllabus (3)
ESC572
Issues in Secondary School Chemistry
Teaching (3)
ESP572
Secondary School Physics Teaching (3)
Winter Course
ETP500
Teaching Practice (3)

Bachelor of Education in Computer
Science Education
Program Structure
Level 100
Semester 1
COM111S Communication and Study Skills I (3)
Core
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I(4) Core
CSI131
Discrete Structures I (3) Core
CSI141
Programming Concepts (3) Core
CSI161
Introduction to Computing (3) Core
Semester 2
COM112S Communication and Study Skills II (3) Core
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4) 		
(Prerequisite MAT111) Core
CSI132
Discrete Structures 11 (3) (Prerequisite
CSI131) Core
CSI142
Object-Oriented Programming (4) 		
(Prerequisite CSI141) Core
Plus 1 elective (3)
Level 200
Semester 1
ESE 261 Basic Teaching Methods in Secondary
School Computer Studies (3) Core

ESE 271
ESE 241
CSI 247
CSI 293
Core

Psychology of Teaching and Learning
Computer Science (3) Core
Instructional Design and E-Learning (3) Core
Data Structures (3) (Prerequisites CSI132,
CSI142) Core
Information Technology Fundamentals (3)

Semester 2
ESE272
Introduction to the Nature of Computer
Science (3) Core
ESE262
Practicum in Secondary School Computer
Studies Teaching (Prerequisite ESE261) Core
CSI262
Database Concepts (3) (Prerequisites CSI247)
Core
CSI251

Computer Organisation & Architecture (3)
(Prerequisites CSI141, CSI161) Core
Plus one Elective Course (3)
Semester 3
EST263
Secondary School Experiences in Computer
Science, Mathematics and Science 		
Education (3) (Prerequisite ESE262) Core
Level 300
Semester 1
ESE361
Teaching Strategies for School Computer
Studies (3) (Prerequisite ESE262) Core
ESE365
Introduction to Research Methods in
Computer Science Education (3) Core
CSI354
Operating Systems (3) (Prerequisites CSI247,
CSI251) Core
CSI374
Computer Networks (3) (Prerequisites
CSI142, CSI251) Core
CSI342
Systems Analysis and Design (3) 		
(Prerequisite CSI262) Core
Semester 2
ESE362
Advanced Practicum in School Computer
Studies Teaching (3) (Prerequisite ESE361)
Core
ESE372
Development and Evaluation of Computer
Studies Practical Work (3) Core
ESE412
Introduction to Web Design, Development
and Publishing for Teaching (3) Core
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3)
(Prerequisite CSI262, CSI374) Core
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3) 		
(Prerequisite CSI342) Core
Semester 3
EST363
Reflective Teaching Practice in Computer
Science, Mathematics and Science 		
Education (3) (Prerequisite ESE362) Core
Level 400
Semester 1
ESE461
Advanced Teaching Methods in School
Computer Studies (3) (Prerequisite ESE362)
Core
ESE451
Computing Project (4) Core
ESE441
Enrichment Topics in Computer Studies
Education (3) Optional
ESE471
Contemporary Issues in Computer 		
Education (3) Optional
ESE 337 Philosophy of Computer Science Teaching
(3) Optional
CSI323
Algorithms CSI 247
CS (3) Optional
CSI 341
Introduction to Software Engineering (3) l
(Prerequisite CSI 342) Optional
CSI 485
System Administration (3) (Prerequisites CSI
354, CSI 374) Optional

60

ECO111
MGT100
MKT100
STA101

Basic Microeconomics (3) Optional
Principles of Management (3) Optional
Principles of Marketing (3) Optional
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences (3) Optional

Semester 2
EST472
Research-based Teaching Practice in
Computer Science, Mathematics and
Science Education (15) (Prerequisites
EST363, ESE361) Core

DEPARTMENT OF SPORT SCIENCE
Entry Requirements
Subject to the provision of General Regulation 00.0 and
20.00 (General Regulation for Degree Programmes) and
the Faculty of Education Special Regulation 10.30, the
following Departmental Special Regulations shall apply:
To enter at Level 100, applicants must possess:
BSS (Exercise Science & Wellness)
BGCSE/equivalent with a minimum of grade D in English
Language, Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics or Biology,
or a minimum of grade CC in Science Double Award or
equivalent.
Applicants possessing relevant Certificate or Diploma in
exercise science or a related field may be admitted to
Level 200 or 300.
BSS (Recreation & Sport Management)
BGCSE/equivalent with a minimum of grade D in English
Language and Mathematics.
Applicants possessing relevant Certificate or Diploma in
recreation and sport management or a related field may
be admitted to Level 200 or 300.
BSS (Physical Education & Coaching)
BGCSE/equivalent with a minimum of grade D in English
Language, Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics or Biology,
or a minimum of grade D in Science Double Award or
equivalent.
Applicants possessing relevant Certificate or Diploma in
physical education, coaching, sport science or a related
field may be admitted to Level 200 or 300.
BSS (Sport & Exercise Psychology)
BGCSE/equivalent with a minimum of grade DD in
English Language, Mathematics and Biology.
Applicants possessing relevant Certificate or Diploma in
psychology, physical education, coaching, sport science
or a related field may be admitted to Level 200 or 300.

BACHELOR OF SPORT SCIENCE
(EXERCISE SCIENCE & WELLNESS)
Year 1
Semester One
COM101 Communications and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med)
GEC (2)
ICT121
Computing Skills Fundamentals I GEC (2)
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4) Core
BIO122
Animal Physiology & Biochemistry
(3) Core
CHE101
General Chemistry (4) Core
BSS112
Socio-cultural foundations of Sport &
Exercise (3) Core
TOTAL CREDITS 19
Semester Two
COM102 Communications and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med)
GEC (3)
ICT122
Computing Skills Fundamentals II

GEC (2)
Diversity of Plants & Animals Core
(pre-requisite to BIO211) (4)
BSS121
Exercise Lab Techniques (3) Core
BSS122
Principles of Exercise and Sport Training
(3) Core
BSS123
Aquatic Skills (3) Core
TOTAL CREDITS 18

Hockey (3) Core
Elective (3)
TOTAL CREDITS 15

BIO112

Semester Two
BSS422
High Performance Training, Analysis &
Evaluation (3) Core
BSS423
Sport Injuries Rehabilitation (3) Core
BSS424
Entrepreneurship in Sport & Exercise
(3) Core
BSS425
Sport Science Research Project II
(3) Core
BSS426
Strength & Conditioning Technique
(3) Core
TOTAL CREDITS (15 credits)

Year Two
Semester One
BIO211
Cell Biology (3) Core
FHS201
Human Anatomy (3) Core
PHY112
General Optics and Mechanics, Vibrations
and Waves (4) Core
BSS212
Exercise for Special Populations (3) Core
BSS214
Injury Prevention and Emergency Care in
Physical Activity (3) Core
Elective (2)
TOTAL CREDITS (18 credits)

BACHELOR OF SPORT SCIENCE
(RECREATION & SPORT
MANAGEMENT)

Semester Two
FHS202
Human Physiology (3) Core
BSS221
Motor Learning & Skills Acquisition
(3) Core
BSS222
Special Needs and Adapted Physical Activity
(3) Core
BSS234
Sport Science Internship (3) Core

Level 100
Semester one (17 credits)
Core courses
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
BSS112
Socio-cultural Foundations of Sport &
Exercise (3)
BSS114
Foundations of Sport Management (3)
Elective (3)

Choose one of the following Options:
BSS231
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Basketball (3) Option
BSS232
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Handball (3) Option
Elective (3)
TOTAL CREDITS (18 credits)
Year Three
Semester One
BSS310
Kinesiology
Core 3
BSS311
Biochemistry of Exercise
Core
BSS312
Nutrition for Sport, Exercise and Wellness
(3) Core
BSS313
Applied Biomechanics Core 3
Elective
3
TOTAL CREDITS (15 credits)

GEC COURSE
COM161E Communication and Academic literacy
Skills I (3)
ICT121E Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)

3

Semester Two
BSS321
Research Methods in Sport & Exercise
(3) Core
BSS322
Principles of Sport & Exercise Psychology
(3) Core
BSS323
Tests, Measurement & Evaluation in Sport &
Exercise. (3) Core)
BSS324
Sport Science Internship (3) Core
BSS330
Exercise Physiology I (3) Core
Plus one option from the following:
BSS333
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Badminton (3) Option
BSS331
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in Table
Tennis (3) Option
TOTAL CREDITS 18
Year Four
Semester One
BSS411
Exercise Physiology II (3) Core
BSS412
Exercise Testing, Prescription & Counselling
(3) Core
BSS417
Sport Science Research Project I (3) Core
Plus one of the following options:
BSS418
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Cricket (3) Option
BSS419
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in

Semester two (17 credits)
Core courses
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
BSS123
Aquatic Skills (3)
GEC COURSE
COM162E Communication and Academic literacy Skills
II (3)
ICT126E Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
Level 200
Semester three (15 credits)
Core courses
BSS216
Sport Industry & Organizations (3)
BSS217
Sport Marketing & Sponsorship (3)
BSS218
Sport Facilities Management (3)
ACC201
Introduction to Cost Accounting (3)
One Elective (3)
Semester four (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS226
Sport Tourism (3)
BSS227
Human Resource Management in Sport (3)
BSS228
Sport Information & Communication
Management (3)
BSS229
Sports Law (3)
BSS234
Sport Science Internship (3)
Plus one option from the following
BSS231
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Basketball (3)
BSS232
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Handball (3)
Level 300
Semester five (15 credits)
Core courses

BSS314
Exercise & Sport Economics (3)
BSS317
International Sport Management (3)
BSS318
Sport and Recreation Policy Analysis (3)
BSS319
Recreation & Sport League Programming (3)
One Elective (3)
Semester six (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS321
Research Methods in Sport & Exercise
(3)
BSS322
Principles of Sport & Exercise Psychology (3)
BSS323
Measurement, Data Analysis in Sport &
Exercise (3)
BSS324
Sport Science Internship (3)
BSS325
Sport Finance (3)
Plus one of the following options:
BSS333
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Badminton (3)
BSS331
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in Table
Tennis (3)
Level 400
Semester seven (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS413
Ethics in Sport & Exercise Industry (3)
BSS414
Athlete Career Development (3)
BSS415
Recreation, Sport & Sustainable 		
Development (3)
BSS417
Sport Science Research Project I (3)
Prerequisites BSS 321
Plus one of the following options:
BSS418
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Cricket (3)
BSS419
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Hockey (3)
Semester seven (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS424
Entrepreneurship in Sport & Exercise (3)
BSS429
Leadership and Supervision in Sport and
Recreation (3)
BSS430
Sport Event Management (3)
BSS431
Technology in Sport Management (3)
BSS425
Sport Science Research Project II (3)
Prerequisites BSS 417
One Elective (3)

BACHELOR OF SPORT SCIENCE
(PHYSICAL EDUCATION & SPORT
COACHING)

Level 100
Semester one (18 credits)
Core courses
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
BSS112
Socio-cultural Foundations of Sport &
Exercise (3)
BSS115
Foundations of Physical Education & Sport
Coaching (3)
GEC COURSE
COM161E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (2)
ICT121E Computer Skills Fundamentals I (3)
Semester two (16 credits)
Core courses
BSS122
Principles of Exercise and Sport Training (3)
BSS123
Aquatic Skills (3)
BSS126
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in Track
& Field (3)
GEC COURSE
COM162E Communication and Academic Literacy

61

ICT122E

Skills II (2)
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (3)
Elective (2)

Level 200
Semester three (18 credits)
Core courses
BIO211
Cell Biology (3)
BSS214
Injury Prevention and Emergency Care in
Physical Activity (3)
BSS215
Instructional Strategies for Elementary &
Secondary Physical Education (3)
BSS219
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Soccer (3)
BSS221
Motor Learning & Skills Acquisition (3)
One Elective (3)
Semester four (15 credits)
Core courses
BIO231
Human Anatomy (3)
BIO232
Human Physiology (3)
BSS222
Special Needs and Adapted Physical Activity
(3)
BSS234
Sport Science Internship (3)
Choose one of the following Options:
BSS231
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Basketball (3)
BSS232
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Handball (3)
Level 300
Semester five (17 credits)
Core courses
BSS312
Nutrition for Sport, Exercise and Wellness
(3)
BSS313
Applied Biomechanics (3)
BSS315
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Netball (3)
BSS320
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Volleyball (3)
BSS328
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Softball (3)
One Elective (3)
Semester six (15 credits)
Core courses
BSS321
Research Methods in Sport & Exercise (3)
BSS322
Principles of Sport & Exercise Psychology (3)
BSS323
Measurement, Data Analysis & Evaluation in
Sport & Exercise (3)
BSS324
Sport Science Internship (3)
BSS 330 Exercise Physiology I.
Plus one option from the following
BSS331
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in Table
Tennis (3)
BSS333
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Badminton (3)
Level 400
Semester seven (17 credits)
Core courses
BSS411
Exercise Physiology II (3)
BSS413
Ethics in Sport & Exercise Industry (3)
BSS416
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Gymnastics & Dance (3)
BSS417
Sport Science Project I (3)
Plus one of the following options:
BSS418
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Cricket (3)
BSS419
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Hockey
BSS421
Motor Development Across Life Span (3)

Level 400
Semester eight (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS422
High Performance Training, Analysis &
Evaluation (3)
BSS423
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Tennis 		
(3)
BSS424
Entrepreneurship in Sport & Exercise (3)
BSS425
Sport Science Research Project II (3)
Prerequisites BSS 417
BSS433
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Combat Sports (3)
BSS434
Sport Coaching Specialization & Licensing
(3)

BACHELOR OF SPORT SCIENCE
(SPORT & EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY)
Level 100
Semester one (15 credits)
Core courses
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
BSS112
Socio-Cultural Foundations of Sport &
Exercise (3)

GEC COURSE
COM161E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (2)
ICT121E Computer Skills Fundamentals I (3)
Semester two (17 credits)
Core courses
PSY 102 Biological bases of Human Behaviour (3)
BSS123
Aquatic Skills (3)
BSS124
Introduction to Sports & Exercise 		
Psychology (3)
GEC COURSE
COM162E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (2)
ICT122E Computer Skills Fundamentals II (3)
Elective (3)
Level 200
Semester three (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS 203 Cohesion & Team Dynamics in Sports (3)
BSS211
Strength & Conditioning (3)
BSS214
Injury Prevention and Emergency Care in
Physical Activity (3)
BSS220
Sensorimotor Control (3)
BSS221
Motor Learning & Skills Acquisition (3)
Elective (3)
Semester four (18 credits)
Core courses
PSY201
Theories of Personality (3)
BSS222
Special Needs and Adapted Physical Activity
(3)
BSS230
Nutrition for Sport, Exercise and Wellness
(3)
BSS234
Sport Science Internship (3)
Choose one of the following Options:
BSS231
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Basketball (3)
BSS232
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Handball (3)
Elective (3)
Level 300
Semester five (15 credits)

Core courses
BSS321
Research Methods in Sport & Exercise (3)
BSS332
Positive Youth Development Through Sport
(3)
BSS323
Measurement, Data Analysis & Evaluation in
Sport & Exercise (3)
BSS324
Science Internship (3)
Choose one of the following Options:
BSS333
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Badminton (3)
BSS331
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in Table
Tennis (3)
Semester six (18 credits)
Core courses
BSS316
Psychological Skills Training in Sports (3)
BSS326
Cultural Issues in Sport & Exercise 		
Psychology (3)
BSS327
Psychosocial Bases of Coaching (3)
BSS329
Stress Management in Sport & Performance
(3)
Two Electives (3)
Level 400
Semester seven (15 credits)
Core courses
BSS413
Ethics in Sport & Exercise Industry (3)
BSS414
Athlete Career Development (3)
BSS 417 Sport Science Research Project I (3)
BSS420
Assessments in Sports & Exercise Psychology
(3)
Plus one of the following options:
BSS418
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Cricket (3)
BSS419
Coaching Techniques and Strategies in
Hockey (3)
Semester eight (15 credits)
Core courses
BSS424
Entrepreneurship in Sport & Exercise
Science (3)
BSS425
Sport Science Research Project II (3)
Prerequisites SES321 & SES324
BSS427
Psychology of Sport Injuries (3)
BSS428
Health Behaviour (3)
BSS435
Consulting & Intervention Programs in
Sport & Exercise Psychology (3)

DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY
EDUCATION

Entry Requirements
The program has 4 entry points. Subject to the provision of
the General Academic Regulation 20.2, and to the Faculty
of Education Special Regulations the following Special
Regulations of the Department of Primary Education
program shall apply:
Bachelor of Primary Education: 4 years:
1.The normal entry requirements at level 100 shall be a
BGCSE/equivalent with a minimum grade of C in English
Language
2.Those who want to specialise in Mathematics and/
Science Education should normally have a grade D in
English language, and a C in Mathematics and/ Science or
Double Science Award.
3. Applicants with a 3-year Diploma in Primary Education
or its equivalent shall normally enter at Level 300.
4. Holders of a 2 year Diploma in Primary Education or its
equivalent shall normally enter at Level 200

62

5. Holders of Certificate in Primary Education or its
equivalent shall normally enter at Level 100.
In addition, the following requirements shall determine
the areas of specialization.
i)
For pre-service, to specialize in mathematics or
science candidates should have a minimum of a C grade
in EPM 100, EPM 112, EPM 120 and EPM 125 at Level 100
of the DPE program. Candidates who meet the Faculty of
Science entry requirements shall be exempted from the
above DPE courses and shall enter at Level 100 of the
Faculty of Science program.
ii) For pre-service, to specialize in Languages (English or
Setswana) candidates should have a minimum of pass in
each subject area from Level 100.
iii) For pre-service, to specialize in Social Studies and
Religious Education, candidates should have a pass in
Social Studies, or Developmental Studies, or Religious
Education, or History, or Geography from Level 100.
iv)
For in-service, to specialize in mathematics or
science candidates should have a minimum of a C grade
in mathematics or science at College level, and shall
enter at Level 100 of the Faculty of Science program.
v) For in-service, to specialize in either Languages
(English or Setswana) or Social Studies, candidates
should have a minimum of a pass in each of the subjects
at College level.
The program outline is as follows:
LEVEL 100: SEMESTER 1
Major 1: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
EFF 220
Historical, Philosophical and Sociological
Foundations of Education (3) 		
ALL 122 Characteristics of Human language(3)
EPM 120 Introductory Biology and Earth Science
For Primary Teachers (3)
EPM 100 Foundations of Mathematics I (3)
GEC Courses			
COM161E Communication and Academic literacy
Skills I (3)
ICT 121E GEC Computer Skills Fundamentals 1(2)
		
LEVEL 100: SEMESTER 2
Major 1: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
EPM112 Foundations of Mathematics II (3)
EPS203
Indigenous People and their Environment
(3)
ENG131 Writing in English (3)
EPM125 Introduction to Chemistry and Physics (3)
GEC Courses
ICT122E Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)		
COM162E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills 2 (3)			
LEVEL 200: SEMESTER 3
Major 1: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
EPL222
Literacy Across the Curriculum 3 (for
Language students only)
EFP100
EPM223

Introduction to Educational Psychology
(3) 			
Introduction to Numeracy and Science
for Teachers (3) 		

(To be taken by all)
EPE224: Strategies in Teaching Literacy in Schools(3)
		

Major II: Choose one of the following areas of
specialization. This choice will be followed throughout
the course of the degree program
English
ENG211
The Pronunciation of English (3)		
Setswana		
ALL141
Introduction to African Oral and Written
Literature (3)

EPM258 Methods of Teaching Basic Science(3)
		
Social Studies		
EPS201
Theories and Practice of Values in Education
(3)			
TRS209
History of Christian Thought (3)		
Sub-total 4core + option 1 (5)

Choose any ONE Optional course from the
Mathematics
following
MAT111
Introductory to Mathematics I (4)
EPE109
Introduction to Education for Sustainable
EPM100 Foundations of Mathematics I (3)- InDevelopment (3)		
service students		
EPE217
Optional Human Growth and 		
EPM200 Teaching Methods for Mathematics in
Development (3)			
Primary Schools (3)
MUS205 Singing and Conducting (4)		
Science (Choose one of the science courses.
BSS 122 Principles of Exercise and Sport Training
Mathematics is compulsory)		
AED204 Health & Safety in the Art & Design
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
Classroom 			
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)		
LEVEL 300: SEMESTER 5
MAT111
Introductory to Mathematics I (4)
Major I: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
					 Core Courses 		
Social Studies		
EPE316
Assessment in Primary Schools (3)
EPS200
Introduction to Social Studies (3)
EPE300
Organizing & implementing Remedial
programs in schools (3)			
Choose any ONE Optional course from the following
EPE319
Information and Communication 		
EFH201
Counselling over the Lifespan (3)		
Technology Application in Schools (3)
EPI228
Foundations of Early Childhood Education
		
(3)			
chosen in Semester 1, Level 200		
EPI224
Foundations of Environmental 		
English		
Education(3)
ENG311
Modern English Grammar (3) 		
MUS100 Fundamentals of Music Theory (4)
ALL321
The Structure of the Sentence (3)
LEVEL 200: SEMESTER 4
Major I: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
		
EPM225 Strategies in Teaching Numeracy and
Science in Schools (3) 		
EPE213
Project-Based Learning and Teaching
(3)
WINTER SESSION
EPT210
Teaching Practice (6)		
Major II: Continue with the area of Specialization
chosen in Semester 1, Level 200		
English		
ENG221 English Linguistics (3)
ENG233 Poetry of Southern Africa (3)		
Setswana		
ALL142
The Study of Drama (3)
ALL222
Structure of words in African Language
(3)
			
Mathematics		
MAT122 Introductory to Mathematics II (4)
EPM 112 Foundations of Mathematics II (3)- Inservice students
EPM 211 Teaching Number System in Primary
schools (3)			
4 core + option (16)			
Science
(Continue with the area you chose in Level 200
Semester 3)
MAT122 Introductory to Mathematics II (4)
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements
of Modern Physics (4) 		
CHE102
BIO112

General Chemistry II (4)
Diversity of Animals and Plants 		
(4)

63

Setswana		
ALL 221
Sound Systems in African
Language (3)
ALL 321
The Structure of the Sentence (3)		
			
Mathematics		
EPM 227 Introduction to Functions and the domains
(3) (Pre-service)
EPM 327 Introduction to Limits and Tangents (3)
(Pre-service)		
MAT 111 Introductory to Mathematics I (4) (Inservice)
EPM 302 (for both pre and in service) Geometry for
Primary School Teachers (3)		
Sub-total 6 core (for pre-service) 18
5 core (In-service) 16
Science (Continue with the area you chose in Level 200
Semester 3)
Core Courses
PHY 232 Properties of Matter, Basic Thermodynamics
and Introduction to Nuclear Physics (3) (for
pre-service)
CHE 211 Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
(2) (for pre-service)		
CHEM213 Analytical Chem Lab1 (1) (for 		
preservice)
BIO214
Mammalian Physiology (3) (for pre-service)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
(In-service) 		
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4) (In-service)
BIO111
MAT111
EPM323

Principles of Biology (4) (In-service)
Introductory to Mathematics I (4) (Inservice)			
Games and Science Teaching Strategies

(3) (for pre-service)		
Sub-total 5 core (for pre-service) 15
5 core (In-service) 17		
Social Studies (Core)
EPS322
Social Studies and Curriculum Development
(3)
EPS331
Teaching Social Studies in Primary Schools
(3)		
		
Choose any ONE Optional course from the following
ELR 301
EFH303
EPI334

Theory of Religious Education (3)
Multicultural Counselling (3)
Curriculum Development in Environmental
Education (3)
AED303 Theories of Artistic Development
MUS201 Ethnomusicology
EPM223 Introduction to Numeracy and Science for
teachers (3)
EPE224
Strategies in teaching Literacy in schools (3)
			
LEVEL 300: SEMESTER 6
Major I: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
EPE301
Conducting Remedial Teaching in Schools
(3)			
LME302 Introduction to Educational Research (3)
WINTER SESSION
EPT 310
Teaching Practice (8)
Major II: Continue with the area of Specialization
chosen in Semester 1, Level 200		
English		
EPL 300 Theory and Practice of Second Language
Teaching (3)		
ENG321 Usage in English (3)
Sub-total 5 core + elective = 18 credits
				
Setswana		
ALL 323 Introduction to Stylistic and Discourse
Analysis (3)
EPL312
Breakthrough to Literacy (3)
Sub-total 4 core+ elective = 15 credits
				
Mathematics
EPM 426 Introduction to Derivatives and their
Applications (3)-Pre-service
EPM 427 Calculus II (3) (for Pre-service)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4) (Inservice)
EPM331 Teaching School Mathematics (3) (both pre&In-service)
Sub-total 5 core (Pre-service) 15
5 core (In-service) 17

5 core (In-service) 17
Social Studies (Core)
EPS323
Social Studies and Pedagogy (3)
EPS300
Culture & Citizenship Education (3)
Sub-total 4 core + elective 15

Sub-total 4 core + option (Pre-service) 15
4 core + option (In-service) 15
Social Studies (Core)		
EPS401
The Role of Democracy in the Teaching
of Social Studies (3)			
ELR494
The Religious Education Department (3)
Sub-total 4 core + option (Pre-service) 15
4 core + option (In-service) 15

		
Choose any ONE Optional course from the following
ELM301 Theory of Moral Education (3)		
EFH305
Teaching Guidance and Counselling
in Schools and Other Settings (3)		
Choose any ONE Optional course from the
EPI321
Curriculum, Development in Early Childhood
following
Education (3)			 EHF400
Substance Abuse Counselling (3)
EPI335
Evaluation and Monitoring in 		
EPI431
Management of Early Childhood
Environmental Education (3) 		
Programs (3)
EDT310
Instructional Materials (3)		
EPI442
Environmental Conservation Strategies (3)
MUS302 Teaching Methods in Music Education (4)
EPM429 Advanced Concepts in Biology and Earth
PHR267 Teaching PE in Pre-Primary and Primary
Science (3)
Schools (3)
EPM428 Teaching Algebra in schools (3)
			
MUS202 Instrumental Tuition (4)
LEVEL 400: SEMESTER 7
PHR309 Adapted Physical Education (2)
Major I: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
LME403 Practitioner Research (3) (Both _Pre- & In
LEVEL 400: SEMESTER 8
service)
Major I: Primary Education (15-18 credits)
LME308 Managing Education for Sustainable
Core Courses		
Development (3) (Both Pre-& Inservice
EFS404
Education for Children with Attention
Major II: Choose one of the following areas of
Deficit Hyper Disorder (3)
specialization. Continue with the area chosen as
EPE404
Teachers and Curriculum Development (3)
teaching subject in Semester 1, Level 200
		
English (Core)
Major II: Major II: Choose one of the following areas
EPL 414
Literatures in Primary Schools (3)		
of specialization. Continue with the area chosen as
EPL 411
Introduction to the Reading Process (3)
teaching subject in Semester 1, Level 200
Sub-total 4 core + option (Pre-service) 15
Core Courses		
4 core + option (In-service) 15
English (Core)
Setswana (Core)		
ENG351 Phonology of English (3)
EPL414
Literature in Primary Schools (3)
EPL412
Teaching Reading in the Primary School (3)
EPL411
Introduction to the Reading Process (3)
4 core + elective 15
Sub-total 4 core + option (Pre-service) 15
4 core + option (In-service) 15
Mathematics (Core)		
EPM 326 Introduction to probability and Statistics (3)
(for both pre and In-service)
EPM 227 Introduction to Functions and the 		
domains(3) (for in-service)
EPM 327 Introduction to Limits and Tangents (3) (for
in-service)
EPM430 Mathematical Application for Teachers (3)
(Both Pre-& In- service)
Sub-total 4 core + option (Pre-service) 15
6 core (In-service) 18

Science (Continue with the area you chose in Level 200
Semester 3)
Science (Continue with the area you chose in Level 200
Core Courses
Semester 3) Core
PHY 241 Advanced Electricity and Magnetism (3)
BIO218
Biology of Flowering Plants (3) (for Pre(for pre-service)
service)
CHE 221 Atomic Structure Bonding and Main
CHE232 Structure and Survey of Functional Groups
Group (2) (for pre-service)		
(2) (for Pre-service) 		
BIO 215
Principles of Ecology (3) (for pre-service)
CHE234 Organic Chem. Lab (1) (for Pre-		
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
service)
Modern Physics (4) (In-service)
PHY 231 Mechanics, Vibrations and Waves, Physical
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4) (In-		
Optics (3) (for Pre-service)
service)
PHY232 Properties of Matter, Basic Thermodynamics
BIO112
Diversity of Animals and Plants (4) (Inand introduction to Nuclear physics (3) (for
service) 			
In-service)			
MAT122 Introductory to Mathematics II(4) 		
PHY239 Physics Practicals (3.1) (1) (Both Pre-& In(In-service)				
service)			
EPM 339 Current Issues in Science Education (3)
BIO214
Mammalian Physiology(3) (for In-		
(Both Pre-& In-service)		
service)
EPM423 Practical Work in Science Teaching (3)
4 core + elective (Pre-service) 15
(Both Pre-& In- service)		

64

Setswana (Core)
ALL342
African Oral Narratives (3)
EPL412
Teaching Reading in the Primary School (3)
4 core + elective = 15 credits
Mathematics (Core)
EPM 426 Introduction to Derivatives and their
Applications (3) (In-service)
EPM 427 Calculus II (3) (for In-service)
EPM 421 Teaching algebra in schools (3) (for both
Pre- and In-service)
EPM400 The Use of Technology in Teaching Primary
Mathematics (3) (Both Pre-& In-service)
Sub-total core + elective (Pre-service) 15
6 core (In-service) 18
Science (Continue with the area you chose in Level 200
Semester 3)
BIO216
General Microbiology (3) (for Pre-service)
CHE242 Introductory Physical Chemistry (2) (for
Pre-service)
CHE244 Physical Chem Lab 1 (1) (for Pre-service)
PHY241
Advanced Electricity and Magnetism (3)
(In-service)
PHY242 Basic Electronics (3) (For Pre-service)
BIO213/215 Plant Structure and Function/Principles of
Ecology (3) (In-service)
EPM449 Curriculum Design and Research in Science
Education (3) (Both Pre-& In- service)
Sub-total 4 core + elective (Pre-service) 15
4 core + elective (In-service) 15
Social Studies (Core)		
EPS400
Contemporary Issues in Teaching Social

ELM402
EPS 403

Studies (3)			
Curriculum Design in Moral Education
(3)
International Organizations and Governance
(3)			

Choose any ONE Optional course from the following
EFH407
Consultation in Schools and Community
Settings (3)
EPI444
Environmental Multilateral Agreements in
Conservation Education (3)
AED403 Art & Design Education and 		
Entrepreneurship (4)
MUS400 Movement in Music (4)
PHR308 Scientific Basis of Coaching and
Officiating (2)
Assessment shall be as per the University of Botswana
General Academic Regulation 00.8
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall be in
accordance with the General Regulation 00.9 for full
time, and 00.312 for part-time candidates.
Students taking Mathematics and Science courses in
the Faculty of Science program shall not take Level 200
courses without having cleared the level 100 courses.
At the end of level 200, students will undergo Teaching
Practice of 7weeks, and another 7 weeks at the end of
level 300.
Award of Degree
Minimum standards of achievement for the award of the
qualification:
To be awarded a BPE degree, a student must satisfy all
relevant provisions of Academic General Regulation
00.851. A student must achieve a minimum of 120 credits
(480 notional credit hours) inclusive of 290 credits for
the core courses and optional courses, and 190 credits
for the General Education (GECs) and Electives. Holders
of a 2 or 3-year Diploma who are exempted from Degree
levels of 1 and 2 must take at least 12 credits of GEC and
Elective courses including at least credits from Area 3.
Degree Classifications:
The degree of Bachelor of Primary Education (BPE) shall
be classified in accordance with general regulation 20.4.

BACHELOR OF EDUCATION
LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT
(BELM)
Entry Requirements
ED11.10 Bachelor of Educational Leadership and
Management (BELM) shall normally be 3 years
ED11.11 Applicants with a Diploma in Educational
Leadership and Management or equivalent shall enter at
Level 300 of the degree programme.
ED11.12 ED11.12 Applicants with a Diploma in Education
or its equivalent shall be admitted into either Level
200 or 300 of the Degree Programme on the basis
of accumulated credits in the area of Educational
Leadership and Management or related areas. Relevant
work experience in an educational setting shall be an
added advantage..
ED11.13 Holders of a Teaching Certificate plus BGCSE
will normally enter at level 100.Reference will be made

to the articulation policy of the University of Botswana
to determine the possibility of entering at other levels
as appropriate.

LME303
LME307

ED11.14 Holders of a Teaching Certificate or its
equivalent who do not meet the requirements above
but have experience in an educational setting as
managers will be admitted into level 200. Applicants
seeking admission through this route shall submit
recommendation letters and proof of experience in
teaching and evidence of prior learning
ED11.20 GENERAL PROVISION
11.21 The B Ed Educational Leadership and Management
is 3-year single major degree programme. All
students are required to take Core Courses, General
Education Courses (GEC), Electives and Optional
Courses as defined in General Regulation 00.212
11.22 Progression from semester to semester will be as
per General Regulation 00.9.for full time and 00.312
for part-time candidates
11.23 The normal workload for a full time student shall
be as stipulated in General Regulation 00.611 for the
part-time will be as per regulation 00.312.
11.24: The award of the degree shall be as stipulated
in General Regulation 00.851. 11.25: At the end
of level 200, the students will undergo Internship
of four weeks and another 4 weeks at the end of
level 300. The Internship is an integral component
of educational leadership and management training
and it is a requirement for the award of a degree.

Bachelor of Educational Leadership
and Management (BELM)
LEVEL 200: SEMESTER 3
Major: Leadership & Management in Education (15-18
credits)
Core Courses
LME209 Human Resource Management in 		
Educational Settings (3)
LME203

Theories and Practice of Educational
Leadership (3)
LAW131 Introduction to Law (3)
LME204 Fundamentals of Improved Teaching and
Learning (3)
1 Elective (3)			
LEVEL 200: SEMESTER 4
Major: Leadership & Management in Education (15-18
credits)
Core Courses
LME 201 Classroom Management: Theory and
Practice (3)		
REC 011 Introduction to Records Management (3)
LME 206 Introduction to Educational Planning (3)
LME 308 Managing Education for Sustainable
Development (3)		
Choose any ONE Optional course from the
following
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)		
EPS201
Theories and Practice of Values in Education
(3)			
LME200 INTERNSHIP (8)		
LEVEL 300: SEMESTER 5
Leadership & Management in Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
LAW355 Law and Education (3) 		
LME301 Leadership Styles and Organizational

65

EPE319

Behaviour (3)		
Strategic Planning and Leadership in
Education (3)			
Quality Assurance for School Improvement
(3) 			
ICT Applications in Schools (3)

LEVEL 300: SEMESTER 6
Leadership & Management in Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
EPE 316 Assessment in Schools (3)
LME302 Introduction to Educational Research (3)
LME306 Instructional Supervision and Monitoring (3)
LME310
Educational Data Management (3)
(Pre requisite EPE 319)
		
Choose any ONE Optional course from the
following
EFH 400 Substance Abuse Counselling
LAW 237 Administrative Law (3)			
EPI 334
Curriculum Development in Environmental
Education (3)
LME207
Optional Gender and Educational 		
Leadership (3)			
LME300 INTERNSHIP (8)		
LEVEL 400: SEMESTER 7
Leadership & Management in Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
LME400 Professional Development in
Education (3)
LME402 Contemporary Issues in Educational
Leadership (3)			
LME403 Practitioner Research in
Education (3)
LME408 Marketing Education and Public
Relations (3)		
LME409

Governance in Education (3)

LEVEL 400: SEMESTER 8
Leadership & Management in Education (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
LME406 Educational Policy Analysis, Development
and Evaluation (3)			
LME411
Managing Change & Conflict in Education
(3)			
LME413 Curriculum Planning and Leadership (3)
LME414 Accounting and Procurement Practices for
School Leaders
LME 410 Appraisal and Performance Management
Systems in Education (3)		
Assessment shall be in accordance with General
Academic Regulation 00.8
All courses except LME 200 and LME 300 shall be assessed
as stipulated in general regulation 00.8. Failure without a
good cause to submit continuous assessment (CA) work
within 24 hours of the due date shall carry a penalty of
5 percent marks. Failure to submit CA within 48 hours
of the due date shall carry a penalty of 50 percent
marks. Failure to submit CA within one week from the
due date shall incur a zero mark. Failure without cause
to participate in the internship programme shall incur a
zero mark.
Progression from Semester to Semester: At the end of
each semester the Grade Point Average (GPA) shall be
calculated as per General Regulation 00.86. Retaking
shall be considered as per General Regulation 0092 and
0093.

Award of Degree: In order to be awarded a degree, a
student must achieve a minimum of 120 credits (480
notional credit hours) inclusive of 290 credits for the
core courses and optional courses, and 190 credits for
the General Education (GECs) and Electives as stipulated
in General Regulation 00.851 and 00.852. Holders of a
2 or 3-year Diploma who are exempted from Degree
levels of 1 and 2 must take at least 12 credits of GEC and
Elective courses including at least credits from Area 3.
Degree Classifications: The degree of the Bachelor of
Educational Leadership and Management (BELM) shall
be classified in accordance with the General Regulation
20.4.

BACHELOR OF EDUCATION (EARLY
CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT &
EDUCATION) - 4 YEARS
Programme Regulations
Subject to the provision of General Regulation 00.0
and 20.00 (General Regulations for Bachelor’s Degree
Programmes) and the Faculty of Education Special
Regulation 10.30, the following Departmental Special
Regulations shall apply:
Entry Requirements
i)Four (4) year Programme for Teachers (education
specialization), the applicants must have:
• at least Botswana General Certificate of Secondary
Education (BGCSE), Cambridge holders or its equivalent
with at least a C or better in English Language and shall
enter at Level 100 for pre-service.
• a teaching Certificate to enter at Level 100
• a Diploma in Primary Education to enter at Level
200/300 and relevant work experience in an educational
setting would be an added advantage.
Programme Structure
All Specializations
Level 100: Semester 1 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
EPI228
Foundations of Early Childhood Education
(3)
EFP100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
AED101
Foundations and Critical Studies in Art
Education (4)
ICT121
Computing & Information Skills 		
Fundamental I (2)
COM161 Communication & Study Skills I (3)
Level 100: Semester 2 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
EPI229
Theories and Principles of Early Childhood
Education (3)
ECD100
Health and Safety of Young Children (3)
FCS103
Prenatal and Early Childhood Development
(3)
COM162 Communication & Study Skills II (3)

BECDE EDUCATION SPECIALIZATION

Level 200: Semester 3 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD 200 Language Development and Literacy in Early
Childhood (3)
ECD201
Early Childhood Education for 		

ECD202
ECD 204

Environmental Sustainable Development (3)
Play and Creativity in Early Childhood (3)
Concepts of Early Numeracy And 		
Mathematics (3)

Optional Courses
EFA100
School Organisations (3)
EFS 250 Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for with
Learning Disabilities/Difficulties (3)
FCS102
Introductory Nutrition (3)
EPI224
Foundations of Environmental Education (3)
EPE316
Assessment in Primary Schools (3)
EFS242:
Early Intervention Programmes for Young
Children with Mental Retardation (3)
*Choose only ONE Optional Course.
ELECTIVE (3
Level 200: Semester 4 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD203
Manipulation and Discovery In Science and
Social Science (3)
ECD 204 Concepts of Early Numeracy And 		
Mathematics (3)
ECD 205 Behaviour Problems and Guiding Young
Children (3)
AED 204 Health and Safety in Art and Design
classroom (3)
Elective (3)
WINTER SESSION
Teaching Practice –EPT 210. (8)
Level 300
Semester 5 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD301
EPE319
EPI320

Educator and Professional Development (3)
ICT Applications in Schools (3)
Learning Experiences and Material 		
Development (3)

Optional Courses *Choose only ONE Optional Course.
MUS100 Fundamentals of Music Theory
EFS101
Introduction to Exceptional Children
EFS251
Remediation Techniques in School Subjects
with Learning Disabilities (3)
EPL411
Teaching Reading in Primary Schools (3)
EPL414
Literature for Primary Schools (3)
Elective (3)
Semester 6 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD 303 Learning Through Play (3)
EPI 321
Curriculum Development in Early Childhood
Education (3)
ECD 405 Child Study
LME 302 Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Elective (3)
WINTER SESSION
EPT 310 (8)
Level 400 Semester 7 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD400
Child Protection, Advocacy and Children’s’
Rights (3)
ECD403
Music, Movement and Drama (3)
LME403: Practitioner Research (3)
BNS 219 HIV Education and Life Skills
Elective (3)
Semester 8 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD402
Culture and Indigenous Knowledge in ECE
(3)
ECD404
Guidance and Counselling in ECE (3)
EPI431
Management of Early Childhood 		

66

EPI432

Programmes (3)
Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood
Education (3)

Optional Courses
DSW105 Social Services with Families and Children
(3)
FCS304
Meal Management (3)
EPS300
Culture and Citizenship Education (3)
*Choose only ONE Optional Course.
ED11.20 General Provision
11.21 The Bachelor of Early Childhood Education is
normally a four-year single major degree programme.
All students are required to take Core Courses, General
Education Courses (GEC), Electives and Optional Courses
as defined in General Regulation 00.212
11.22 Progression from semester to semester will be as
per General Regulation 00.9.for full time and 00.312 for
part-time candidates
11.23 The normal workload for a full time student shall
be as stipulated in General Regulation 00.6 for the
parttime will be as per regulation 00.312.
11.24: The award of the degree shall be as stipulated in
General Regulation 00.851.
11.25: At the end of level 200, the students will undergo
Teaching Practice of four 7 weeks and another 7 weeks at
the end of level 300. The Teaching Practice is an integral
component of Early Childhood Education training and it
is a requirement for the award of a degree.

BECDE EXTENSION (NON-TEACHING)
SPECIALIZATION
Level 200
Semester 3 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD202
Play and Creativity in Early Childhood (3)
ECD206
Infant and Toddler Development 		
Programming (3)
FCS 208 Foundations of FCS Extension (3)
BIO122
Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry (3)
Optional Courses
ECD200
Language Development and Literacy In
Early Childhood (3)
FCS101
Foundations of Family Studies (3)
FCS205
Introduction to Textiles (3)
EFS101
Introduction to Exceptional Children (3)
PHR 267 Teaching Physical Education in Pre-Primary
School (3)
*Choose only ONE Optional Course.
Semester 4 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD205
Behaviour Problems and Guiding Young
Children (3)
ECD207
Curriculum and Programme Development
in ECD (3)
FCS102
Introduction to Nutrition (Pre-requisites
Bio 122) (3)
FCS212
Group Processes and Dynamics (3)
Optional Courses
FCS209
Technology and Creative Sewing (Prerequisites FCS 205) (3)
FCS210
Foundations of Food Preparations (3)
FCS211
Introduction to Interior Design (3)
FCS313
Human Development Across the LifeSpan (3)
ECD208
Technology in ECD (3)
EDT310
Planning and Producing Materials for
Primary Teachers (3)

*Choose only ONE Optional Course.
Level 300
Semester 5 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD300
Professionalism and Ethics in ECD (3)
FCS352
Theory and Practice when Interacting with
Young Children (Pre-requisite FCS 103) (3)
FCS301
Methods of Teaching FCS Extension (3)
FCS317
Developmental Assessment and 		
Intervention with Young Children (3)
Optional Courses
FCS314
Textile Design and Product Development
(Pre-requisite FCS 205) (3)
FCS407
Human Development Seminar (3)
FCS409
Management of Family Resource (3)
FCS418
Family Health Education (3)
MGT202 Small Business Management (3)
PHR407 Motor Development and Movement
Experiences for Young Children (3)
GEC247 HIV/AIDS Education Prevention and
Control (3)
*Choose only ONE Optional Course.
Level 300
Semester 6 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD304 Cognitive Stimulation of at Risk Children (3)
FCS308 Programme Planning and Evaluation in FCS
Extension (Pre-requisite FCS 208) (3)
FCS309 Research Methods in FCS (3)
FCS316 Parenting and Socialisation Process in the Family
(3)
Elective (3)
Level 300
Winter Semester (7 weeks)
FCS312 Field Attachment (3)
Level 400
Semester 7 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
ECD400
Child Protection, Advocacy and Children’s
Rights (3)
ECD401
Family Development and Interpersonal
Relationships (3)
FCS402
Management of FCS Extension Programmes
(Pre-requisite FCS 208, 308) (3)
FCS417
Risk and Resiliency in Child Development (3)
Elective (3)
Semester 8 (15 Credits)
Core Courses
FCS403
Research Project in FCS (Pre-requisite
FCS309) (3)
ECD402
Culture and Indigenous Knowledge in
ECD (3)
ECD406
Pre-schooler Development and
Programming (3)
FCS427
Public Policy for Children and Families (3)
Optional Courses
FCS411
Community Mobilization (3)
FCS304
Meal Management (3)
FCS424
Housing and Environment for Children (3)
FCS426
Issues and Trends in Early Childhood
Development (3)
FCS428
Development and Administration of Early
Childhood Programmes (3)
*Choose only ONE Optional Course.

BACHELOR OF EDUCATION - ART AND
DESIGN (BEAD)
ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
Subject to the provision of General Regulation 00.0 and
20.00 (General Regulation for Degree Programmes) and
the Faculty of Education Special Regulation 10.30, the
following Departmental Special Regulations shall apply:
5.1 Pre-Service applicants must have:
5.1.1 At least three credits in the Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE) or its
equivalent with at least a C or better in English
Language. Applicants enter at Level 100.
5.2 In-Service applicants must have:
5.2.1 Teaching Certificate or Diploma in Primary/
Secondary Education
5.2.2 Applicants with Teaching Certificate enter at Level
100.
5.2.3 Applicants with Diploma in Primary/Secondary
Education as non-art specialists enter at Level 200.
5.2.4 Applicants with Diploma in Primary/Secondary
Education as art specialists enter at Level 300.
5.2.5 Applicants with Certificate in Visual Arts from
recognised institutions enter at Level 200.
5.2.6 Applicants with Diploma in Visual Arts from
recognised institutions enter at Level 300.
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE
LEVEL 100
Semester 1
Take all courses (15 Credits)
Core Courses
AED 101 Foundations and Critical Studies in Art
Education (3)
AED 102 Fibre Arts and Crafts and Pedagogy (4)
EFP 100
Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
GEC Courses
COM161E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (3)
ICT 121E Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
LEVEL 100
Semester 2
Take all courses (15 Credits)
Core Courses
AED 103 Gallery and Museum Education (3)
AED 104 Technology in Art and Design Education (3)
AED 105 Artistic Fabric Design and Pedagogy (4)
GEC Courses
COM 112E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (3)
ICT 122E Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
LEVEL 200:
Semester 3
Take all core courses, choose one optional course and
add one elective (15-17 credits)
Core Courses
AED 201 Print Making and Pedagogy (4)
AED 202 Media for Experiential Learning (3)
EFF 220
Historical, Philosophical and Sociological
Foundations of Education (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
BSS214
Injury Prevention and Emergency Care in

67

Physical Activity(3)
Fundamentals Of Music Theory (4)
Literacy Across the Curriculum (3)
Theories and Practice of Educational
Leadership (3)
One Elective Course (3)
LEVEL 200:
Semester 4
Take all core courses andchoose one optional course
(16-17 credits)
Core Courses
AED203 Arts, Culture and Education (3)
AED 204 Health and Safety in the Art and Design
Classroom (3)
AED205 Three Dimensional Construction and
Pedagogy (4)
LME 201 Classroom Management Theory and Practice
(3)
MUS100
EPL 222
LME 203

Choose one from the following
EPS 201 Theories and Practice of Values in Education
(3)
EPE 109 Introduction to Education for Sustainable
Development (3)
FCS 211
Introduction to Interior Design (3)
MUS104 Instrumental Percussion & improvisation
Techniques (4)
EPE 217 Human Growth and Development (3)
LME 206 Introduction to Educational Planning (3)
EPM 211 Teaching Number System in the Primary
School (3)
LEVEL 300
Semester 5
Take all core courses and choose one optional course
(16-17 credits)
AED 301 Curriculum Design in Art and Design
Education (3)
AED 302 Malleable Media Construction and 		
Pedagogy (4)
AED 303 Theories of Artistic Development (3)
EFS 250
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
Students with Special Needs (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
BFA 203 Acting Movement & Mime (3)
MUS201 Ethnomusicology (4)
EPI 320
Learning Experiences and Material 		
Development (3)
EPI 334
Infusing Environment Education in the
Curriculum (3)
LME 303 Strategic Planning & Leadership in 		
Education (3)
MUS 302 Teaching Methods in Music Education (4)
LEVEL 300
Semester 6
Take all core courses and choose one optional course
(15-16 credits)
LME 302 Introduction to Educational Research (3)
AED 304 Integrative Approaches to Teaching the Arts
(3)
EFH200
Group Counselling (3)
EDT 310 Instructional Materials (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
LME 301 Leadership Styles & Organisational 		
Behaviour (3)
BMS 229 Basics of Vedio Production (3)

LEVEL 400
Semester 7		
Take all core courses, choose one optional course and
one elective (15-17credits)
Core Courses
AED 401 Professional Practice in Art and Design
Education (4)
AED 402 Contemporary Issues and Practices in Art
and Design Education (3)
LME 403 Practitioner Research (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
MUS 202 Instrumental Tuition (4)
EPI 442
Environmental Conservation Strategies I (3)
PHR424 Movement and Creative Dance
Technique (2)
FCS 408 Fashion, Culture and Society (3)
EFS 240
Curriculum and Instructional Methods for
Students with Mild to moderate Retardation
(3)
EFS 351
Career Education for Students with Learning
Difficulties (3)
LME 402 Contemporary Issues in Educational
Management (3)
MUS 400 Movement in Music (4)
Elective Course (3)
LEVEL 400
Semester 8
Take all core courses, choose one optional course and
one elective. (15-17credits)
Core Courses
AED 403 Art and Design Education and 		
Entrepreneurship (4)
BFA 415 Drama in Education (3)
LME 406 Policy Development, Analysis, 		
Implementation and Evaluation 		
in Education (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
MUS 400 Movement in Music (4)
PHR407 Motor Development and Movement (2)
PHR309 Adapted Physical Education I (2)
Elective Course (3)

BACHELOR OF MUSIC EDUCATION
(BME)

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
The Bachelor of Music Education Degree shall have 4
entry points. Subject to the provision of the General
Academic Regulation 20.2, and the Faculty of Education
Special Regulations the following special Regulations
of the Department of Primary Education programme
shall apply:
a) Applicants with O level (BGCSE) and have studied
music should have minimum of a C in English
Language, and shall enter at level 100 of the BME
degree programme.
b) Holders of Certificate in Primary or equivalent shall
enter at level 100 of the BME degree programme.
c) Holders of a 2 – year Diploma in Primary Education or
equivalent shall normally enter at level 200, on approval
of prior learning.
d) Applicants with a 3 – year Diploma in Primary/
Secondary Education and have specialized in music
education or equivalent shall normally enter at level
300 of the BME degree programme.

PROGRAMME STRUCTURE
LEVEL 100:
Semester 1
Take all Courses (15-21 Credits)
MUS 100 Fundamentals of Music Theory (4)
MUS 101 Ear Training/Sight Reading (4)
MUS 102 Introduction to Instrumental tuition (4)
EFP 100 Introduction to Educational Psychology (3)
GEC Courses
COM161E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (3)
ICT 121E Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
LEVEL 100
Semester 2
Take all courses (15-21 Credits)
Core Courses
MUS 103 History and Appreciation of Botswana
Traditional Music (4)
MUS 104 Instrumental Percussion and Improvisation
Techniques (4)
MUS 105 Introduction to Music Technology 		
Utilization (4)
EFF 110
Introduction to the History of Education (3)
GEC Courses
COM162E Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (3)
ICT 122E Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
MUS 106/7 Teaching Practice (3)
LEVEL 200
Semester 3
Take all core courses (15-18 credits)
Core Courses
MUS 200 Music Theory (4)
MUS 201 Ethnomusicology (4)
MUS 202 Instrumental Tuition (4)
EFF 220
History, Philosophical and Sociological
Foundations of Education (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
EPE 222 Literacy Across the Curriculum (3)
EPE 223 Introduction to Numeracy and Science for
Teachers (3)
BFA 100 Introduction to Theatre (3)
EFS 240
Curriculum and Instructional Methods for
Students with Mild to Moderate Mental
Retardation (3)
LEVEL 200
Semester 4
Take all core courses (16-17 credits)
Core Courses
MUS 203 Music Pedagogy (4)
MUS 204 Music History of the Western World 1:
Medieval, Renaissance & Baroque (4)
MUS 205 Singing and Conducting (4)
LME 201 Classroom Management: Theory and
Practice (3)
Elective Course (3)
MUS 206/7 Teaching Practice (4)
LEVEL 300
Semester 5
Take all core courses (16-17 credits)
MUS 300 Performance Studies (4)
MUS 301 Music Theory Application (4)
MUS 302 Teaching Methods in Music Education (4)
EPE 319 Information Technology Applications in
Schools (3)

68

Choose one from the following optional courses
EPE 300 Organizing and Implementing Remedial
Programmes in Schools (3)
EDT 310 Instructional Materials Instructional
Materials (3)
EFS 250
Diagnostic Teaching in Basic Skills for
Students with Learning Disabilities/		
Difficulties (3)
BFA 206 Theatre in Africa I (3)
EPE 109 Introduction to Education for Sustainable
Development (3)
LEVEL 300
Semester 6
Take all core courses (15-16 credits)
MUS 303 Music Cultures of the World (4)
MUS 304 Music History of the Western World 2:
Classical, Romantic, 20th and 21st Centuries
(4)
EPE 316 Assessment in Schools (3)
LME 302 Introduction to Educational Research (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
BFA 322 Stage Management (3)
EPI 321
Curriculum, Development in Early Childhood
Education (3)
EPI 335
Evaluation and Monitoring in 		
Environmental Education (3)
EFS 251
Remediation Techniques in School Subjects
with Learning Difficulties (3)
MUS 306/7 Teaching Practice (4)
LEVEL 400
Sememster 7
Take all core courses (15-18credits)
Core Courses
MUS 400 Movement in Music (4)
MUS 401 Music Composition (4)
MUS 402 Studio Recording & Publishing (4)
LME 403 Practitioner Research (3)
Choose one from the following optional courses
EPL 411 Introduction to Reading Process (3)
BFA 313 Theatre Ethics (3)
EHF 400 Substance Abuse Counseling (3)
LEVEL 400
Sememster 8
Take all core courses (15-17credits)
Core Courses
MUS 403 Ensemble Performance (4)
MUS 404 Choral Conducting and Arranging (4)
MUS 405 Popular Music Pedagogy (4)
EFS 404
Education for Children with AttentionDeficit
Hyper Disorder (3)
Elective Course (3)
MUS 406/7 Teaching Practice (4)

69

FACULTY OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY

DEAN
Prof Edward Dintwa
BEng (Mechanical), UB
MSc (Postharvest and Food Preservation
Engineering), KULeuven, Belgium
PhD (Applied Bioscience Engineering),
KULeuven, Belgium

DEPUTY DEAN
Dr O.B. Molwane
)Adv. Dip. (Design & Technology
)College of St Mark and St John, U.K(
)B.Ed (Design and Technology) (Exeter University, U.K
)M.Ed (Technology Education) (Manchester, U.K
,PhD (Design Education) (Goldsmith’s College
)University of London, U.K
)PGD (Educational Administration and Management
)IDM, Botswana(
ARCHITECTURE AND PLANNING
FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR

CIVIL ENGINEERING

L. B. J. Dingalo

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

)BA (UB) MA, (Sussex

INDUSTRIAL DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

INDUSTRIAL TRAINING COORDINATOR
)J. N. Tau BSc. (Florida A&M), PGD (UMIST

HUMAN RESOURCES
MANAGER

70

S. K. Dumedisang

The Faculty of Engineering and Technology (FET) is
dedicated to the following aims:
a) To produce high quality engineering, design and built
environment graduates who can adapt to the work
environment and discharge their duties satisfactorily;
b) To be responsive to the needs of the industry in all
sectors of the economy by providing study programmes
designed to meet the need for highly trained
manpower in required areas of engineering, design,
technology and the built environment;
c) To respond to the needs of industry through research,
consultancy, advisory and related services;
d) To maintain a continuous dialogue with industry and
other relevant bodies to determine and fulfil any needs
which may be raised by industry from time to time;
e) To provide access, with proper theoretical and
practical backing, to recent developments in the
technology sector and to prepare graduates for
professional responsibilities;
f) To prepare FET graduates to pursue further studies in
their relevant Design, Engineering, Technology and the
built environment disciplines.
Academic Departments and Programmes
The Faculty of Engineering and Technology consists of
five Departments:
• Department of Architecture and Planning
• Department of Civil Engineering
• Department of Electrical Engineering
• Department of Industrial Design and 		
Technology
• Department of Mechanical Engineering
The Faculty offers undergraduate programmes as
follows: The Department of Architecture and Planning
offers Bachelor of Architecture Degree programme in
Architecture, BSc and MA professional degrees in Urban
and Regional Planning and a Bachelor of Real Estate.
The Department of Civil Engineering offers Bachelor of
Engineering Degree programmes in Civil Engineering,
Geomatics, Mining Engineering and Mineral
Engineering. The Department of Electrical Engineering
offers Bachelor of Engineering Degree programmes in
Electrical Engineering, Electronic Engineering.
The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers
Bachelor of Engineering Degree programmes in
Mechanical Engineering and Industrial Engineering. The
Department of Industrial Design and Technology offers
Bachelor of Design Degree programmes in Industrial
Design, and Design and Technology Education. Details
of the requirements for admission into the various
programmes are outlined in subsequent pages under
each relevant Department. The Faculty of Engineering
and Technology also offers MPhil/PhD programmes
which are interdisciplinary.
210 Special Regulations for the Degree in Bachelor of
Engineering
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations
00.0 and 20.0, the following Special Regulations shall
apply:
21.10
Entrance Requirements
21.11 Admission to the Bachelor of Engineering Degree
shall be as stipulated in General Regulation 20.20.
21.12 The normal minimum entry requirement for

admission to level 100 of the degree programme shall
be BGCSE or equivalent with a minimum of grade D in
English Language and a grade of C in Mathematics and
Physics, and a grade of C in either Biology or Chemistry.
21.13 The normal minimum requirements for admission
to Level 200 of the Degree programme shall be
satisfactory completion of Level 100 of the Bachelor
of Science (General) Degr.ee of the Faculty of Science
with at least C grades in Mathematics, Chemistry and
Physics.
21.14 Applicants in possession of ‘A’ level qualification
with at least C grades in Mathematics and Physics
may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the Degree
programme.
21.15 Applicants in possession of an appropriate
Diploma may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the
Degree programme.
21.16 Applicants in possession of an appropriate Higher
Diploma may be admitted directly into Level 300 of the
appropriate Degree programme.
21.17 Admission into Level 200 and Level 300 of the
Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronic
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering programmes
shall be subject to assessment of prior learning
competencies.
21.20 Programme Structure
21.21
Level 100 courses shall be as specified in the
Faculty of Science Special Regulations for the Bachelor
of Science Degree.
21.22 Level 200 shall consist of the following core
courses:
Semester 3
MMB231 Engineering and Computer Aided Drawing
(3)
CCB231
Material science for Engineers (3, pre-req.
PHY 122)
CCB232 Engineering Mechanics: Statics (3, pre-req.
MAT 122, PHY 112)
EEB231
Electrical Principles I (3, pre-req. MAT 122,
PHY 122)
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics I (3, pre-req.
MAT122)
Semester 4
IBC201
Workshop Technology (3)
MMB241 Dynamics of particles (3, pre-req. MAT291)
CCB241 Mechanics of Materials (3, pre-req. CCB232)
EEB241 Electrical Principles II (3, pre-req. EEB231)
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics II (3, pre-req.
MAT291)
21.23 Students registered for a Bachelor of Engineering
programme shall undergo two periods of Industrial
Attachment of 8 weeks each as specified in Faculty
Special Regulation 22.10.
21.24 At Levels 300, 400 and 500 each student shall
register for departmental prescribed number of core,
optional and elective courses per semester, unless
exempted.
21.25 The availability of optional and elective courses
offered by a Department shall be at the discretion of
the relevant Department.
21.26 A student shall register for a Single Major or a

71

Combined Degree programme in the fifth semester.
21.27 A course may consist entirely of fieldwork, project
work, practical work or seminars. In addition to work
during the semester, a subject may include prescribed
fieldwork or assignments during the vacation periods.
21.30 Assessment
21:30
Assessment: In order to sit for a written
examination, a student should achieve a minimum
of 50% overall CA mark, this affects only examinable
courses
21.31 Continuous assessment in Levels 200, 300,
400 and 500 courses shall be based on tests and/or
assignments (written tasks/projects/presentations), and
where applicable, laboratory reports/field reports.
21.32 For continuous assessment, the ratio of marks
for tests to assignments and/or laboratory marks
shall be 3:2 (60%:40%) unless otherwise specified in
Departmental Special Regulations.
21.33 Except for a Final Year Project and courses
with 100 percent continuous assessment, the ratio of
continuous assessment to end of semester examination
shall be 2:3, unless otherwise specified in Departmental
Special Regulations
21.34 A Final Year Project shall be evaluated by
continuous assessment and a written report,
unless otherwise specified in Departmental Special
Regulations.
21.35 Level 500 Project Report must be submitted
to the co-coordinator at most one week before the
beginning of the end-of semester examinations.
21.36 Courses with a practical component or drawing
included in a written examination shall be examined
by end of semester examination of duration of at least
3 hours.
21.37 Industrial Training shall be assessed as specified in
the Faculty Special Regulation 22.20.
21.38 Failure without good cause to submit an item of
continuous assessment within 24 hours of the due date
shall carry a penalty of 5 percentage marks per day.
Failure to submit the assignment before the end of one
week from the due date shall incur a zero mark.
21.39 A student who fails to sit a continuous
assessment test without documented valid reasons
shall score a zero mark for that test. A student absent
from a test with documented legitimate reason shall be
entitled to a special test.
21.40
Regulations 21.41 to 21.45 shall apply to
Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
Engineering and Electronic Engineering programmes.
21.41 In order to pass a course, a student must achieve
the following:
a) Meet specific requirement(s) of the course e.g.
satisfactory performance in the attendance of practical
sessions as indicated in the course description; and
b)
Pass the specified course learning outcome(s);
and
c)
Obtain a final mark of at least 50%.
21.42 Failure to meet any of the requirements specified
in regulation 21.41 will result in scaling down of the
final course mark to 49%, which results in course
failure.

21.43 Where a student fails a course learning
outcome(s) that cannot be remedied by passing an
examination, such a student cannot be admitted into
the examination.
21.44 All courses identified for assessment of exit level
learning outcomes shall be externally moderated. A
student not meeting an exit level outcome shall be
awarded a failure mark for the relevant course.
21.45 In order to be eligible for a qualification, a
student must satisfactorily meet all exit level outcomes.
220 Industrial Training Regulations for the Faculty of
Engineering and Technology Programmes
Subject to the provisions of General Regulations 00.0
and 20.0, the subsequent Industrial Training Regulations
shall apply to students in the following programmes:
• Bachelor of Design (Industrial Design)
• Bachelor of Design (Design and Technology
Education)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Civil)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Electrical)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Electronic)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Industrial)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Mineral)
• Bachelor of Engineering (Mining)
• Bachelor of Geomatics
• BSc in Urban and Regional Planning
• Bachelor of Architecture

22.22b) Industrial Attachment report and logbook
submitted by the student at the end of the Industrial
Attachment period;
22.22c) Oral Presentation of Industrial Attachment
report.
22.23 ITB340 shall be assessed as based on Regulations
22.22 a) and 22.22 b). The ratio of marks for continuous
assessment to Industrial Attachment report shall be 1:2.
22.24 ITB440 shall be evaluated as specified in
Regulation 22.22. The ratio of marks for continuous
assessment to Industrial Attachment report to oral
presentation shall be 1:2:1.
22.21 The final result for ITB340 and ITB440 shall be
based on a pass or fail basis: a pass shall be awarded
for a final mark of at least 50%, otherwise a fail shall
be awarded. (Marks for ITB will not contribute towards
the GPA or classification – ITB200 and ITB420 may be
maintained for non-ECSA programmes).

Semester 1
IBC 110
Design Fundamentals (3)
IBC 111
Elements & Principles of Design (3)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics & Mechanics, Vibrations
Waves (4)
MAT 191 Design Mathematics I (3)
ICT 121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
COM 131 Introduction to Communication & Academic
Literacy Skills (3)
Semester 2
IBC 120
Design Materials & Processes I (3)
IBC 121
Graphical Communication I (3, pre-req. IBC
111)
PHY 122 Electricity, Magnetism & Elements of
Modern Physics (4, pre-req. PHY112)
MAT 192 Design Mathematics II (3, pre-req. MAT 191)
ICT 122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2, pre-req.
ICT 121)
COM 132 Academic and Professional Communication
(3, pre-req. COM 131)
23.22 Level 200 shall consist of the following courses:

230 Special Regulations for the Degree in Bachelor of
Design
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations
00.0 and 20.0, the following Special Regulations shall
apply:
23.10 Entrance Requirements
23.11 Admission into Level 100 of the Bachelor of
Design Degree Programme shall be as stipulated in the
General Admission Regulations.

Semester 3
IBC 210
Design Materials & Processes II (3, pre-req.
IBC 120)
IBC 211
Design for Sustainability (3)
IBC 212
Graphical Communication II (3, pre-req. IBC
121)
IBC 213
History of Art & Design (3)
IBC 214
Product Design Studios: Electronics (3)
EFP 101
Foundations of Development Psychology (3)
- Bdes DTE

22.10 Programme Structure for Bachelor of Engineering
22.11 A student shall undergo two periods of supervised
Industrial Attachment: 8 weeks between Levels 300
and 400 (winter session), and another 8 weeks between
Levels 400 and 500 (winter session).
22.12 Industrial Attachment course codes shall be as
follows, unless otherwise specified in the departmental
regulations:
a) ITB340 Industrial Attachment I (duration 8 weeks, 4
credits, core course)
b) ITB440 Industrial Attachment II (duration 8 weeks, 4
credits, core course).
22.13 During the course of Industrial Attachment, a
student shall be subjected to such codes, procedures,
laws, rules, and other regulations as applicable to the
industry.
22.14 Subject to Regulations Governing Admissions,
Fees and Discipline Regulation 4.2, and Regulation
22.13 above, a student who receives a final warning for
misconduct during the course of Industrial Attachment
shall be subjected to Discipline Regulations.
22.20 Assessment
22.21 During the course of the Industrial Attachment
period, each student shall be visited at least once at the
location of placement to be assessed by the Faculty of
Engineering and Technology staff.
22.22 A student’s performance will be assessed by
means of:
22.22a) Continuous assessment by the industrial based
supervisor and an assessor from a relevant department
of the Faculty of Engineering and Technology;

23.12. Admission into Level 100 of the Bachelor
of Design Degree Programme shall be a minimum
requirement of a BGCSE with a minimum of grade
D in English Language and a grade C in Design and
Technology or Art and Design, a grade C in Mathematics
and Physics or a minimum of grade BB in Science
Double Award or equivalent.
23.13 Admission into Level 200 of the Bachelor of
Design Degree Programme shall be as stipulated in
General Admission Regulations.
23.14 Admission into Level 200 of the Bachelor
of Design Degree Programme shall be satisfactory
completion of Level 100 of the Bachelor of Design
programme.
23.15 Applicants in possession of an appropriate A level
qualification with at least D grades in Mathematics and
at least one of the following: Physics or Design and
Technology, may be admitted directly into Level 200
of the Degree Programme. These applicants may be
required to do Level 100 courses if necessary.
23.16 Applicants in possession of an appropriate
Diploma may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the
Degree Programme.
23.17 Applicants in possession of an appropriate
Higher Diploma or a three year Diploma in Design and
Technology, Industrial Design, Graphic Design, Interior
Design, Furniture Design or any other design related
and equivalent programmes may be admitted directly
into Level 300 of the Degree Programme.
23.20 Degree Structure
23.21 Level 100 courses for the Bachelor of Design
Degree shall consist of the following courses.

72

Semester 4
IBC 220
Graphical Communication & Multimedia (3,
pre-req. IBC 212)
IBC 221
Product Styling (3, pre-req. IBC 212)
IBC 223
Physical Ergonomics (3)
IBC 224
Design Studio: Structures & Mechanisms (3)
MKT 100 Principles of Marketing (3) - Bdes ID
EFF 220
Historical, Philosophical & Sociological
Foundations of Education (3) – Bdes DTE
23.23 Students registered for a Bachelor of Design
Degree Programme shall undergo industrial training as
specified under Departmental Special Regulations.
23.24 At Levels 300, 400 and 500 each student shall
register for General Education Courses as prescribed by
General Regulation 00.2124, Departmental prescribed
number of core, optional and elective courses per
semester, unless exempted.
23.25 The availability of optional and elective courses
offered by a Department shall be at the discretion of
the Department.
23.26 A student shall register for a Single Major or a
Major-Minor Degree Programme in the fifth semester.
23.27 A subject may include courses consisting entirely
of fieldwork, project work, practical work, and seminars.
In addition to work during the semester, a subject may
include prescribed fieldwork or assignments during the
vacation periods.
23.30 Assessment
23.31 Continuous assessment in Levels 100, 200, 300,
400 and 500 courses shall be based on tests and/or
assignments, projects and where applicable laboratory
reports/field reports.
23.32 Except for a project and courses with 100

percent continuous assessment, the ratio of continuous
assessment to end of semester examination shall be 2:3,
unless otherwise specified in the Departmental Special
Regulations.

24.22b) Industrial Training Report and logbook
submitted by the student at the end of the Industrial
Training period.

23.33 a) A Design Project shall be assessed through
documentation (folio, report and diary) of the Design
Process and presentation. The ratio of marks for
documentation to presentation shall be 2:1.

24.22c) Oral Presentation
24.23 IBC 200 and IBI 300 shall be assessed as based on
regulations 24.22a) and 24.22b). The ratio of marks for
Continuous Assessment to Industrial Training Report
and Logbook shall be 1:2.

23.33 b) A Major Make and Evaluate Project shall
be assessed through Product and its Evaluation and
presentation. The ratio of marks for documentation to
presentation shall be 2:1.

24.24 IBI 400 shall be assessed as based on regulation
24.22. The ratio of marks for Continuous Assessment
to Industrial Training Report and Logbook to Oral
Presentation shall be 1:2:1.

23.34 Failure without good cause to submit an item of
continuous assessment within 24 hours of the due date
shall carry a penalty of 5 percentage marks per day.
Failure to submit the assignment before the end of 1
week from the due date shall incur a zero mark.
23.35 A student who fails to sit a continuous
assessment test without documented valid reason shall
score a zero mark for that test. A student absent from
a test with documented legitimate reason shall be
entitled to a special test.
240 Industrial Training Regulations for the Degree in
Bachelor of Design Preamble
Subject to the provisions of General Regulations 000
and 200 the following Industrial Training Regulations
shall apply to students on the following programmes:
a) Bachelor of Design (Design and Technology
Education)
b) Bachelor of Design (Industrial Design)
24.10 Structure
24.11 A student shall undergo a period of supervised
Industrial Training for 8 weeks between Levels 200 and
400.
24.12 Industrial Training course codes shall be as
follows:
a) IBC 200 Industrial Training (duration 8 weeks, 4
credits, core winter course).
b) IBI 300 Industrial Training for Industrial Design
(duration 8 weeks, 4 credits, core winter course).
c) IBI 400 Industrial Training for Industrial Design
(duration 8 weeks, 4 credits, core winter course).
24.13 During the course of Industrial Training a student
shall be subjected to such codes, procedures, laws, rules,
and other regulations as applicable to the industry.
24.14 Subject to Regulations Governing Admissions,
Fees and Discipline Regulation 4.0, and regulation
35.13 above, a student who receives a final warning for
misconduct during the period of Industrial Training shall
be subjected to Discipline Regulations.
24.20 Assessment
24.21 During the periods of Industrial Training, each
student shall be visited a minimum of twice at the
location of placement to be assessed by Faculty of
Engineering and Technology staff.
24.22 A student’s performance will be assessed by
means of:
24.22a) Continuous assessment by the industry based
supervisor and an assessor from a relevant department
of the Faculty of Engineering and Technology.

DEPARTMENT OF
ARCHITECTURE AND
PLANNING
Departmental Regulations for Undergraduate
Programmes General Provisions
Subject to General Academic Regulations and the Faculty
of Engineering and Technology Special Regulations, the
following Departmental Regulations shall apply:
Programmes and Qualification Titles
The Department of Architecture and Planning offers
programmes in Architecture, Urban and Regional
Planning and Real Estate, leading to the following
qualifications:
A Single Major Programme leading to a Bachelor
of Architecture Degree for students specialising in
Architecture.
An Internationally accredited Single Major Programme
leading to either a Bachelor of Science Degree in Urban
and Regional Planning for students who opt to exit the
Basic Urban and Regional Planning Programme after
Four Years or Master of Arts (Professional) for students
exiting the programme after an additional 5th year of
specialization.
A Single Major Programme leading to a Bachelor of
Science Degree in Real Estate for students specialising
in Real Estate.
Aim and Objectives of Undergraduate Programmes
The aim of the URP programme is to train students
to enable them to function and work in the fields of
human settlement development and urban and regional
planning. The Architecture programme is designed to
equip students with the academic knowledge and skills
they will need for a successful professional career in
architecture. The Real Estate programme is aimed at
training students to appreciate, comprehend, theorise,
synthesise, project and guide the development and
utilisation of land property and related resources in
an efficient, equitable and sustainable ways within
frameworks shaped by the current land commoditisation
trends and the country’s future needs. The Programmes
have been carefully developed to be broad based
including courses from the Faculties of Science,
Engineering, Humanities, Social Sciences and Business
that are uniquely related to the cultural heritage of
Botswana. These Programmes will benefit immensely
from each other and also from other departments within
The Faculty.

73

Assessment and Examination
Performance in courses shall be evaluated through
a combination of continuous assessment and final
examination. The duration of examinations will be 2 hours
for all the courses. All studio based and research based
courses shall be assessed by continuous assessment only.
The ratio of continuous assessment to final examination
shall be 2:3. A project or design shall be evaluated
by continuous assessment, oral presentation and/or
demonstration and a written report. The ratio of the marks
for continuous assessment, presentation assessment and
written report shall be 2:1:1. Overall performance in a
course shall be as specified in the General Regulation
00.84. There shall be no supplementary examinations
for all research and studio based courses. A student who
fails a core or pre-requisite. or co-requisite course shall
retake the course when offered again. A student who
has failed an optional/ Elective/general education course
may retake the course or its equivalent.
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall be in
accordance with General Academic Regulation 00.90.
Duration of the Programmes
The duration of the URP Programme shall be 10 to 12
semesters full-time; and the duration of the Architecture
Programme shall be a minimum of 10 and a maximum
of 14 semesters on a full-time basis. While the duration
of the Real Estate programme shall be a minimum of
8 semesters. Award of the Degree General Academic
Regulation 00.85 shall apply. Minimum number of credits
for award of the degree shall be 180 for architecture, 160
for Professional Masters in Urban Planning and Regional
Planning, 130 for BSc in Urban and Regional Planning,
and 133 for Real Estate. Classification of the degree
shall be in accordance with the provisions of General
Academic Regulation 20.4
Professional Training
For Architecture, Urban and Regional Planning and Real
Estate Programmes, students shall be subjected to such
codes, procedures, laws, rules, and other regulations
as applicable to the industry/organisation during the
Professional Training.
Urban and Regional Planning Programme
Students shall undergo Professional Training (Internship)
of 8 weeks duration after levels 200 and 300. The
internship courses are URP 226 and URP 328. During
each Professional Training period, students shall be
visited at least once at locations of placement by staff
teaching the programme to monitor progress and also
give advise where necessary.
Architecture Programme
Professional Training (Internship) Regulations for the
Bachelor of Architecture Programme Subject to the
provisions of General Academic Regulations 00.0 and
100 the following Professional Training Regulations
shall apply to students on the Bachelor of Architecture
Programme.
A student shall normally undergo 3 periods of supervised
Professional Training (Internship) of 8 weeks each after
Levels 200, 300 and 400. Professional Training course
codes are: ARB220, ARB320 and ARB420.
Real Estate Programme
Assessment of Professional Training
A student’s performance will be assessed by means of:
a) Confidential report from the student’s 		
immediate supervisor at location of 		
placement.

b) Professional Training reports and logbook 		
submitted by the student at the end of each
internship period.
c) Professional Training visits by an assessor 		
from the Department of Architecture and 		
Planning.
d) Students will be assessed through 		
confidential reports from the organisation
they have been placed at, production of a
concept paper and an oral presentation. Therefore
the assessment ratio for Confidential Report to
Internship Concept Paper to Oral Presentation shall
be 1:2:1.
For Architecture, Urban and Regional Planning as
well as Real Estate Programmes, a student who has
an incomplete grade shall be allowed to complete
Professional Training at a time recommended by the
Faculty.
Repeating Professional Training
A student who fails to meet the requirements of
Professional Training shall be required to repeat the
training at a time recommended by the Faculty.
Architecture Programme Entrance Requirements
Admission to the BArch Degree programme shall be
as stipulated in General Academic Regulation 20.20
Applicants for admission to level 100 must have a
minimum of Grade D in English Language, a minimum
of Grade C in Mathematics, either a minimum of Grade
C in Physics or Grade BB in Science Double Award, and a
minimum of Grade C in Art or in Design and Technology.
Advanced Standing: Students with credits towards
a degree from other Post-Secondary Educational
institutions are eligible for application and may receive
advanced credit for their prior studies in comparable
courses.

PHY112

Geometrical optics, Mechanics, Vibrations
and Waves

COM131

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (FET) (3)
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
Design Mathematics

ICT121
MAT191

Semester 2
Core Courses
ARB121 Design & Communication II (4)
ARB113
Traditional African Architecture (2)
ARB123 History of Art (2)
ARB124 Environment and Comfort (2)
MAT192 Design Mathematics II (3)
COM132 Academic and Professional
Communication (FET) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
Semester 3
Core Courses
ARB211
Architectural Design I (6)
ARB212 Building Materials & Construction III (2)
ARB213 History of Architecture I (2)
ARB216 Computer Aided Drafting (2)
URP207 Land Surveying and Cartography + Lab (3)
CCB217
Theory of Structures 1 (2)
Semester 4
Core Courses
ARB221 Architectural Design II (6)
ARB222 Building Materials & Construction IV (2)
ARB223 History of Architecture II (2)
ARB214 Energy Efficiency in Buildings (2)
CCB227 Theory of Structure II (2)
Level 200 Winter session:
ARB220 Internship I (2)

Semester 8
Core Courses
ARB421 Architectural Design VI (6)
ARB422 Building Systems II (2)
ARB423 Philosophy of Architecture II (2)
ARB424 Professional Practice I (2)
Optional Courses
ENV412
Environmental Impact Assessment (2)
ENV484 Urbanisation & the Environment (2)
Semester 8
Winter session
ARB420 Internship III (2)
Level 500 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 9
Core Courses
ARB511
Design Project I (8)
CCB519
Building Economics (2)
GEC273 The State & Society (2)
Optional Courses
URP307 Land and Property Evaluation (2)
URP314 Land and Property Management (2)
ARB514 Project Practice II (2)
Semester 10
Core Courses
ARB521 Design Project II (8)
ARB522 Urban & Rural Design Practice (2)
ARB524 Project Management (2)
GEC277 Law & Society in Botswana (2)
A course may consist entirely of fieldwork, project work,
practical work, design, and seminars. In addition to work
during the semester, a subject may include prescribed
fieldwork or assignments during the vacation periods.
COURSE LISTING

All applicants are required to attend an interview with
Architecture Programme Staff and are advised that it
would be an advantage to bring a portfolio containing
evidence of interest in visual arts and/or design.
Admission into the programme is subject to the positive
result of the interview.
In addition to 1.4.1.1, applicants for admission to Level
100 of the programme must take courses in Physics,
Chemistry and mathematics in the Faculty of Science.
Applicants in possession of an appropriate ‘A’ level
qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics and
at least one of:
Physics, Chemistry, Art or Design and Technology
may be exempted from taking Physics, Chemistry and
Mathematics in the Faculty of Science.
Applicants who possess the normal entry requirements
listed in the General Academic Regulation 20.2 but
who do not satisfy 1.4.1.2 or 1.4.1.3 may be admitted
to the programme if they: a) have assessable experience
in artistic and/or design activities and/or b) submit a
portfolio of drawings and design exercises (not exceeding
10) with the application.
Programme Structure
Level 100 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 1
Core Courses
ARB111
Design & Communication I (4)
ARB112
Building Materials & Construction I (2)

Level 300 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 5
Core Courses
ARB311
Architectural Design III (6)
ARB312 Building Services I (2)
ARB313 History of Architecture III (2)
CCB317
Theory of Structures III (2)
Optional Courses
URP200 Introduction to Town Planning (2)
URP202 Infrastructure Planning & Management (20)
(2)
Semester 6
Core Courses
ARB321 Architectural Design IV (6)
ARB322 Building Services II (2)
ARB323 History of Architecture IV (2)
ARB325 Interior Design (2)
LAW253: Foundation Of Engineering Law
Semester 6 Winter session
ARB320 Internship II (2)
Level 400 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 7
Core Courses
ARB411
Architectural Design V (6)
ARB412 Building Systems I (2)
ARB413 Philosophy of Architecture I (2)
LAW452 Construction Law (2)
ARB415 Landscape Design (2)

74

FOR ALL OTHER COURSES NOT OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT PLEASE CONSULT THE RELEVANT
DEPARTMENT FOR THE SYNOPSIS
ARB 111Design Communication I
This course concerns the experience of seeing, drawing
and communication of form, mainly physical form.
It deals with free hand drawing as well as geometric
projections: Orthographic, axonometric, and isometric.
The course deals with communication through three
main topics: free-hand drawing, geometric projections,
and colour.
Credits: 4.
Lectures/Studio: 8 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB112 Building Materials & Construction I
This course deals with building materials and their use
in “fundamental” conditions, “natural” as distinct from
“fabricated” materials: earth and its derivatives and
wod. It does so through observation of these materials
in traditional and modern buildings. The course deals
with materials and process of construction and their
inter-relationship in the way they are used in building.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Tutorials: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Tests and assignments.
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3

ARB113 Traditional African Architecture
This course concerns the genesis of Architecture in Africa
as a part of African Culture. It examines architecture as
a response, an expression, and a formative part of the
communal and individual human habitation. This course
begins with a review of African communes and villages,
proceeds to the study of particular buildings within them
from their origin to the present. Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Tutorials: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Tests and Assignments
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB 121 Design Communications II
This course deals with representation and abstraction in
the process of communication. It deals with free-hand
drawing, perspective projection, three-dimensional
models as instruments of study of geometry and
appearance (light) of physical form, leading to the design
of a simple structure. Pre-req.: ARB111
Credits: 4
Lectures/Studio: 8 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB122 Building Materials &
Construction II
This course deals with building materials and their use
in “fundamental” conditions with focus on industrially
produced materials: cement, concrete, glass, steel and
other metals used in buildings. The course covers basic
characteristics of these materials but focusing on them
as construction materials.
Pre-req.: ARB112
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Tutorials: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1 assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB 123 History of Art
Architecture is rooted in the search for order and the
establishment of immortality. The achievement of
mankind is easily assessed through art, from traditional
art found worldwide and then the beginning of
modernism at the Renaissance. The rising figure of
the individual artist and the several revolutions since
lead to the confirmation of radical movements from
Impressionism onwards, until today. Pre-req.: ARB113
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Test and 1 assignments
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB 124 Environment and Comfort
This course introduces (1) the range of human comfort
conditions within the built environment and the effect
of air, light and temperature (2) sources of the natural
and artificial environmental conditions affecting the
built environment including the sun, wind, precipitation,
seasons, day and night, weather and climatic conditions,
electricity, HVAC and (3) the building as a controlled
environment. Coursework consists of lectures providing
knowledge of principles to be observed in field studies
and reports to document the results. Assessment will be
through continuous assessment in form of essays and
tests and a final examination.

Pre-req.: PHY111
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1 assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB211 Architectural Design I
The course will deal with the simplest possible enclosure
– a room, a hut, through examination of the room and
buildings in existing contexts, examples in the work of
architects, and its design by the students. The course
will apply the various types of spatial organization and
basic structures in small buildings in context, and the
possibilities of presentational modes of professional
architecture.
Pre-req.: ARB121
Credits: 6
Lectures/Studio: 12 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB212 Building Materials & Construction III
Students are asked to study selected buildings as case
studies, analyse the use of materials and methods of
construction in the building, and apply the results in
their own design. Emphasis will be put on cladding and
external finishes.
Pre-req.: ARB122
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Weekly exercises
Final examination: Detailed Project assignment
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB 213 History of Architecture I
The course Covers Architecture as a development of the
individual and community as inhabitants of the earth.
It examines the seminal building and communal forms
that emerge as the “typical” forms in this evolutionary
process. Beginning with the Prehistoric, the main
civilisations from Mesopotamia to Rome are examined,
detailing their main aspects.
Pre-req.: ARB123
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Test and assignments
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB214 Energy Efficiency In Buildings
This course deals with the following topics: Basic
principles of energy efficiency, energy efficiency and
sustainable development, energy efficient design
(passive and active design), technologies for energy
efficient building, energy efficiency policy and legislation
introduction to energy management, green financing.
Throughout the course, case studies and existing good
practice examples will be used as a major instrument
of instruction. Assessment will be through continuous
assessment in form of essays and tests and a final
examination.
Pre-req: ARB124
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1 assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB216 Computer Aided Drafting
Introduction to computers and two drafting tools: Arch-

75

Cad and Auto-Cad. This course involves four lectures
followed by extensive exercise and application of
exercises in the use of two architectural drafting tools.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Interim assessments
Final examination: Assessment of major design project
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB221 Architectural Design II
More advanced and institutional building types form
the vehicle of instruction in this course, allied with
case studies and the understanding of natural light in
architecture. A full response of the selection of materials,
appropriate f i n i s h e s a n d m o r e c o m p l e x
structural applications is also demanded to ensure
competence at
this level.
Pre-req.: ARB211
Credits: 6
Lectures/Studio: 12 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB222 Building Materials & Construction IV
Students are asked to study selected buildings, analyse
the use of materials and methods of construction in
the building, and apply the results in their own designs.
Emphasis will be put on materials used for interior
finishes: floor and wall tiling, ceilings etc.
Pre-req.: ARB212
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 3 assignment
Final examination: Major Design Project
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB223 History of Architecture II
The course will deal with architecture as a development
of the individual and community as inhabitants of
the earth and examines the seminal building and
communal forms that emerge as the “typical” forms in
this evolutionary process. Beginning with Early Christian
architecture, the course proceeds to deal with the
middle Ages, looking at Europe, Africa and the Far East.
Pre-req.: ARB213
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB 220 Internship I
Internship means the external placement of a student
with a professional or other kind of body in order
to gain the necessary experience of the profession.
During the long vacation of May to July, students
spend at least eight weeks undergoing this professional
experience. Staff visit the students and meet their
supervisors to get a feedback on the attachment.
Pre-req.: None
Credits: 2
Duration: Minimum 8 weeks.
Assessment: Field Supervisor/Concept Paper/
Presentation
=1/2/1
ARB311 Architectural Design III
This course builds on the input of previous design
courses with the emphasis on buildings serving the
community. More advanced structural analysis and

response is expected, and issues of detailed planning
of site and overall organization are explored, resulting
in deepening awareness of architecture in relation to
current norms of professional achievement.
Pre-req.: ARB221
Credits: 6
Lectures/Studio: 12 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Project: 1:3
ARB312 Building Services I
This course covers building services including water
supply and plumbing, drainage and waste disposal,
electricity supply, lighting, communications, HVAC, fire
fighting, and conveyance. Assessment will be done by
essays and examination.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB313 History of Architecture III
The Post-Renaissance period up to nineteenth century
was a period of revolutions in science, technology,
commerce, and politics and had a decisive shaping
influence on today’s world. The achievements of the
High Renaissance and the Baroque are examined and
how the Enlightenment and other movements prepared
the way for Modernist ideas in the early nineteenth
century.
Pre-req.: ARB223
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB321Architectural Design IV
The emphasis in this course is to heighten the
interpretation of more complex briefs and building
programmes, with emphasis on landscape, structure
and basic building services. The final design should be a
multi-storey building with a public address, and related
to full exploration of design method and competent
presentation on professional lines.
Pre-req: ARB311
Credits: 6
Lectures/Studio: 12 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project.
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB322 Building Services II
Subsequent to ARB321, this course will cover a practical
analysis of the requirements of a selected building
type followed by design of the building services as part
of the process of design. Assessment will be done by
coursework.
Pre-req.: ARB312
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 3 assignment including
a case study report
Final examination: Project based on studio project
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3

ARB323 History of Architecture IV
This course deals with the rise of modern states/cities
and institutions in Europe following the Industrial
Revolution and examines new building types and
technology in response to these developments up to the
present. Clear notions of High Modernism are followed
by a treatment of Postmodernism.
Pre-req: ARB313
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB320 Internship II
Internship means the external placement of a student
with a professional or other kind of body in order
to gain the necessary experience of the profession.
During the long vacation of May to July, students
spend at least eight weeks undergoing this professional
experience.
Staffs visit the students and meet their supervisors to
get a feedback on the attachment.
Pre-req.: ARB220
Credits: 2
Duration: Minimum 8 weeks.
Assessment: Field Supervisor/Concept Paper/
Presentation
=1/2/1
ARB325 Interior Design
The course consists of extensions of the current
architectural design project in the studio. Students are
taught to deal with colour, light and texture as well
interior arrangements and spatial qualities. Advanced
awareness of issues such as the integration of
structures,
services and environmental control are also expected.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: Assessments of studio projects
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB411 Architectural Design V
This course will be concerned with urban and
community issues of some complexity and the
development of design skills in terms of functional
and environmental control systems. Possible vehicles
of delivery could be an urban design complex or social
housing, accompanied by building studies and/or
selected exemplars incorporated in a short report to
accompany drawings and model.
Pre-req.: ARB321
Credits: 6
Lectures/Studio:
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB412 Building Systems I
The course will introduce the detailed critical analysis of
the various Building Systems and their interactive effect
on the built environment in general. It will include
group work studies, review of theoretical material, case
studies, documentation and presentation. Assessment
will be done by coursework.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 2 term papers
Final examination: Case study report
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3

76

ARB413 Philosophy of Architecture I
This course consists of examination of main theories of
architecture since the Renaissance and exercises aimed
at helping the student to develop/ refine their own
position in design. Many aspects of philosophical and
cultural criticism are introduced, leading to a final essay
on a major topic.
Pre-req.: ARB323
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: At least 1 test and 1 assignment
Continuous assessment: Tests and Assignments
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB415 Landscape Design
This course consists of study of principles of landscape
design as related to design of micro-climate and
ecological considerations. It is centred around lectures
on land and landscape design and parallel
studioexercise
based closely on the context of the architectural design
project in ARB411.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: Assessments of studio projects
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB421 Architectural Design VI
This course will treat a major building of known
performance or derived brief, and of high complexity
in terms of structural application, formal exploration
and environmental control systems and sustainability.
The brief must be fully understood and realized in the
design response, and issues of contemporary theory
and international norms should be addressed as well.
Pre-req.: ARB411
Credits: 6
Lectures/Studio: 12 hours per week
Continuous assessment: Research report and interim
assessments of design project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB422 Building Systems II
The course introduces analytical methods in
architectural design by applying the knowledge of
various building systems from previous courses.
Students are required to produce a comparable
analytical report of their own design.
Pre-req: ARB412
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 2 assignments and 1
case study report
Final examination: Project based on studio project
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB423 Philosophy of Architecture II
The course will engage with current issues of the
region, and especially those of Botswana. The diversity
of contemporary architecture will be explored leading
to a final essay dealing with a particular building or
practitioner.
Pre-req.: ARB413
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3

ARB424 Professional Practice I
The course deals with an introduction to the common
and statute law and goes into the details of contract
law before concentrating on construction contracts,
types of building contracts and conflict/dispute
resolution. Pre-req.: LAW253
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB420 Internship III
Internship means the external placement of a student
with a professional or other kind of body in order
to gain the necessary experience of the profession.
During the long vacation of May to July, students
spend at least eight weeks undergoing this professional
experience. Staffs visit the students and meet their
supervisors to get a feedback on the attachment. Prereq.: ARB320
Credits: 2
Duration: Minimum 8 weeks.
Assessment: Field Supervisor/Concept Paper/
Presentation =1/2/1
ARB511 Design Project I
The course consists of a proposal for a project at a
community scale and the design from general strategy
to Preliminary design stage, accounting for massing,
basic organizational strategies and other issues of
relevant importance.
Pre-req: ARB421
Credits: 8
Lectures/Studio: Individual supervised research
Continuous assessment: Interim assessments of
research report
Final examination: Final assessment of research report
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB514 Professional Practice II
This course deals with the following issues: Architect
licensing process, techniques and rationale of marketing
architectural services, market forecasting, client
behaviour, office organisation and business methods
applied to architecture, meeting procedures. Pre-req.:
ARB424
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB521 Design Project II
This course requires the students to take the proposal in
ARB511 – or using an alternative strategy depending on
the student. The course requires the student to prepare
and present a proposal for a final design. Students will
be expected to develop performance criteria for major
spaces and components for the design and to present
results to a high professional degree.
Pre-req: ARB511
Credits: 8
Lectures/Studio: Individual supervised studio
Continuous assessment: Interim assessments of design
project
Final examination: Final assessment of design project
CA/Exam ratio: 1:3
ARB522 Urban and Rural Design Practice
This course requires a comprehensive urban study of the
project selected as the subject of ARB521. The students

will be required to prepare a comprehensive research
report on possible approaches to the urban design
aspects of the “thesis” project – ARB521. The report
will be illustrated with design options related to each
approach and to develop a selected approach in detail.
Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
ARB524 Project Management
This course deals with various processes and techniques
of monitoring projects: the project life cycle, project
planning and control, project cost control, Work
Breakdown Structures (WBS), Programme Evaluation
and Review Technique (PERT), Critical Path Method
(CPM). Credits: 2
Lectures/Studio: 2 hours per week
Continuous assessment: At least 1 test and 1
assignment
Final examination: 2 hours
CA/Exam ratio: 2:3
Bachelor of Science/Master of Arts (Professional) Degree
in Urban and Regional Planning Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Degree programme shall be as
stipulated in General Academic Regulation 20.20
Applicants for admission to level 100 must have a
minimum Grade of C in English Language, Mathematics,
and Geography. Preference will be given to candidates
with a minimum of grade C in Art or Design and
Technology.
Students will upon successful completion of Level 400
(spatial component) be awarded Bachelor of Science in
Urban and Regional Planning (BSc.URP), and will have
an option to pursue Level 500 (specialist component),
of which upon successful completion, will be awarded
Master of Arts Professional Degree in Urban and
Regional Planning (MA Prof. URP).
Applicants with a BSc. URP or equivalent with a
minimum GPA of 3.0 may be admitted into Level 500 of
the internationally accredited degree programme by the
Royal Town Planning Institute, United Kingdom.
Programme Structure
The programme is structured as follows:
• 1 year of preparatory foundation studies 		
with selection of cognate subjects that 		
will lead to a smooth transition from 		
preparatory to professional planning studies.
• 3 years of professional planning studies 		
designated as spatial planning component
• 1 year of professional planning studies 		
designated as specialist planning 		
component
Level 100
Semester 1
Core courses
URP110
Introduction to Planning and Built 		
Environment (3)
ENS101
Introduction to Environmental Science
Physical (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Social Sciences I (3)
ECO111
Basic Micro-Economics (3)
General courses
COM131 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (FET) (3)

77

ICT121

Computing Skills Fundamentals I (2)

Semester 2
Core courses
URP111
History of Planning (3)
ENS102
Introduction to Environmental Science
Human (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Social Science II (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro-Economics (3)
General courses
COM132 Academic and Professional
Communication (FET) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core courses
URP220 Planning Theory I (3)
URP221 Planning Graphics and Communication (4)
CGB213 Principles of Cartography (3) ENS 242
Introduction to Spatial Analysis (3)
ARB216 Computer Aided Drafting (2)
Semester 4
Core courses
URP223 Site Planning and Design I (4)
URP224 Planning Theory II (3)
URP225 GIS for Planners (3)
URP222 Planning Methods & Techniques (3)ENS243
Introduction to Remote Sensing (3)
Winter session
URP226 Professional Training/Internship I (4)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core courses
URP320 Planning Practice (3)
URP321 Transportation Planning & Management
(3)
URP322 Environmental Land Use Planning (3)
URP323 Site Planning and Design II (4)
Optional courses
SOC329 Urban Sociology (3)
Semester 6
Core courses
URP324 Public Facilities and Services Planning (3)
URP325 Urban & Regional Economics (3)
URP326 Neighbourhood Planning and Design (4)
URP327 Infrastructure Planning and Management
(3)
Optional courses
SOC335 Rural Sociology (3)
Winter session
URP328 Professional Training/Internship II (8 weeks)
(4)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core courses
URP420 Planning Legislation (3)
URP421 Planning and Management for Climate
Change (3)
URP422 Urban Regeneration and Renewal (4)
Optional courses
URP424 Land and Property Development (3)
URP423 Gender and Planning (3)
Semester 8
Core courses
URP425 Contracting and Planning Project 		

URP426
URP427

Management (3)
Planning Implementation and Techniques
(3)
Planning Ethics (3)

URP428 Urban Governance and Management (3)
Optional courses
RES310
Property Management (3)
URP429 Urban Agriculture (3)
Level 500
Semester 9
Core courses
Urban Design, Environment and Housing Specialization
URP500
Research Methods and Techniques (3)
URP501
New Urbanism (3)
ARB415 Landscape Design (3)
URP503 Integrated Housing Studies (3)
Planning Policy and Strategy Specialization
URP500 Research Methods and Techniques (3)
URP505 Integrated Development Planning (3)
URP506 Regional and Rural Planning		
and Development (3)
URP507 Comparative Planning (3)
Planning Methods and Techniques
URP500 Research Methods and Techniques (3)
URP510
Planning Support Systems (3)
URP511
Development Impacts Analysis (3)
URP512 Public Participation and Negotiations
Techniques (3)
Optional courses
Urban Design, Environment and Housing Specialization
URP504 Healthy City Planning (3)
ENS404
Environmental Impact Assessment (3)
Planning Policy and Strategy Specialization
URP508 Administrative and Policy Planning (3)
URP509 Smart Growth Planning (3)
Planning Methods and Techniques Specialization
URP513 Community Planning Methods and
Scenarios (3)
URP514 Urban Ecological Footprint Methods (3)
Semester 10
Core courses
URP 515 Supervised Dissertation/Research Project
(15)
COURSE LISTING
FOR ALL OTHER COURSES NOT OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT PLEASE CONSULT THE RELAVENT
DEPARTMENT FOR THE SYNOPSIS
URP110 – Introduction to Planning and Built
Environment.
Introduction to Planning and the Built Environment
offers an introduction to the complexities of
contemporary planning. The course will open with a
discourse on the diverse and sometimes conflicting
definitions of planning. It will then proceed on a journey
through the dynamic sub-discipline foci encompassed
in planning theory and practice. The course content
will draw from both practice and theory, bringing the
two together by way of lectures, seminars, a field trip,
guest speakers and varied assessment. This journey will
conclude with a return to the fundamental questions
raised at the start of course – that of the conflicting
definitions of contemporary planning.

URP111 History of Planning.
All settlements display various degrees of forethought
and conscious design in their layout and functioning.
The building and the planning of settlements has a long
and complex history. However, planning as an organised
profession has existed for less than two centuries.
URP220 - Planning Theory I.
Introduction to Planning Theory: what is Planning?
What is theory? Object of Planning Theory; Rational
Comprehensive Tradition. Urban Master Planning
tradition and its critics; Disjointed Incrementalism:
Urban development tradition and Action planning
Advocacy Planning: the participatory planning
tradition- community action planning.
URP221 - Planning Graphics and Communications.
Description, use and care of equipment. Line drawing –
pencil and ink. Lettering – freehand, guided and transfer
letters. Colouring and shading – pencil, ink, magic
markers and transfer tones/shades. Graphical language,
presentations and exhibitions. Scales – scale formula,
application of formula, types of scales (linear, fraction,
statement, ratio etc). Scale change and conversion.
Measurements – straight and other distances; and
area measurements at various scales. Projections orthographic (plan, sections and elevations), isometric,
axonometric and perspectives. Measured drawing
exercise.
URP222 - Planning Methods and Techniques.
Sources of data for planning, analysis of data,
projections for various land use requirements/
activities, plan Evaluation, plan Implementation
and monitoring. Data Collection Techniques - direct
and indirect methods. Data analysis methods –
classification, sampling, graphical methods, Models
of Forecasting Techniques – aggregate forecasting,
composite forecasting, normative forecasting,
population forecasting, Housing and employment
forecasting. Plan preparation – alternative development
scenarios. Evaluation Techniques - partial evaluation,
comprehensive evaluation. Presentation Techniques.
Techniques for plan implementation.
URP223: Site Planning and Design I.
Processes and tools: land and society, land planning and
design, spatial information and mapping. Site selection
and programming: land valuation, site selection context,
site selection factors, site alternatives, programming
methods, programming documentation. Site inventory
and analysis: physical attributes, biological attributes,
cultural attributes, integration and synthesis. Design
and implementation: concept development, project
components, concept evaluation, design development
and implementation.
URP224: Planning Theory II
Introduction: social theory and its role in social
science; Structural Functionalism - main tenets and
application to urban and regional planning: The case
of modernization perspective; Symbolic Interactionism
- main tenets and application to urban and regional
planning- the case of participatory planning; Marxist
Social theory - main tenets and application to urban
and regional planning - political economy approaches
and radical planning; Communicative Action theory planning as negotiation.
URP225: GIS for Planners
GIS Theory: Basic Concepts, Historical Development,
Data Sources, Data Capture Methods, Data Structure,
Hardware and software Configuration, GIS and Remote
Sensing, Review of GIS software. GIS Practice: GIS data

78

concepts. Finding and connecting data. Organising data
with ArcCatalog. Creating a geodata base. Ensuring
spatial data integrity. Data compilation and editing.
Collecting, importing and converting GIS data. Creating
and modifying features. Mapping and visualization.
Working with layer. Setting the map extent and scale.
Symbolising data. Geographic Analysis. Working with
tabular data. Working with spatial data.
URP226: Professional Training/Internship I (8 weeks).
During internship the students should be able to collect
basic data, analyse data, prepare base maps, update
maps and prepare simple layouts.
URP320: Planning Practice.
Introduction and overview of professional planning
practice. Quality urban planning and project
management: what works, what doesn’t? Understanding
the entrepreneurial ethics and processes. Challenge and
creativity in post-modern planning. The market place
and changing demands of effective planning practice.
The public image and the ‘leadership’ role of the
planner. Marketing your services and products .Project
presentation and review procedures. Communication,
negotiation and presentations. Staying ahead.
URP321 - Transportation Planning & Management.
Transportation system objectives and constraints, modes
of transportation, institutional structure, Transportation
system issues and challenges, traffic congestion, traffic
safety, equality of access, environmental protection,
funding, environmental protection, Transportation
planning, perspectives on the planning process,
planning regulations, transportation and air quality
planning, planning studies, planning study organisation,
Transportation demand analysis, travel behaviour
travel demand modelling, trip generation models, trip
distribution models, mode choice models, trip assignment
models, Transit Operations, route planning, route
location, stop location, route schedules, Transportation
project evaluation, economic evaluation techniques,
environmental impact assessment.
URP322 - Environmental land use planning.
Introduction to Environmental Planning: Issues of
Environmental Concern; Sustainability and Sustainable
development; The Nature of Planning; The Environmental
Planning Process; Striking a Balance. Perspectives on
Environmental Planning: Two integrating Perspectives
– Natural Resources and Environmental systems; The
Scientific Perspective; The Social Scientific Perspective;
Foundations of Environmental Planning: Legal;
Economic; Ethical; Ecological. Planning and Managing
the Natural Resource Base: The Changing Countryside;
Productive uses of rural resources; Mineral Resources.
Rural Environmental Planning: Principles of Landscape
Ecology; Environmental Planning and the Countryside;
Landscape and Nature; Planning Catchments
and Rivers; Recreation Ecology; Natural Resource
Management Plans. Urban Environmental Planning:
Urban Growth and its Management; Managing
Demand; Shelter and Urban Form; Energy; Managing
Waste and Recycling Land; Traffic and Transport; Nature
in the City; Industrial Ecology.
URP323 - Site Planning and Design II.
Definition of site planning: basic principles of plot
layout. Energy and resource efficiency. Landscape
and microclimate. Town Planning Standards. Design
Codes. Concept planning and design development;
site planning/development process; Site systems; Site
planning and design and sustainability issues. Design

rationale (s). Bubble diagrams. Design alternatives.
Evaluation of Design alternatives. Preliminary design.
Final design. Implementation tools. Development
Control (Residential, Industrial, Commercial, Civic
and Community, Recreational, mixed land use, etc.).
Accessibility, circulation and parking.
URP324: Public Facilities and Services Planning.
Definition of public and community facilities and
services vis a vis commercial and private facilities;
Characteristics of public/community facilities; Type,
design and location requirements for educational
facilities; Characteristics and design considerations
for health facilities; Recreational facilities ( passive
and active recreation, green areas and open spaces,
parks, sports grounds and stadiums, indoor and
outdoor facilities); Cultural and religious facilities –
churches, libraries; Security facilities– fire halls, police
stations; Public services – post offices, phone and
telecommunication facilities, etc.
URP325: Urban & Regional Economics.
Topics include models and techniques for describing
and evaluating urban economies; central place theory,
agglomeration economies, urban land use models, intraurban location models, development strategies and
tools; commercial, industrial, and housing development;
and problems of poverty and housing. In addition
the course covers This course includes the following
topics: comparative costs vs. comparative advantage,
location analysis for industry, various indices of location
measures, land use theories, interregional labour
migration, gravity model, interregional trade, regional
development, regional equilibrium analysis, export base
multiplier, locational quotient, shift share techniques,
regional and interregional input-output analysis, and
econometric models for regional analysis.
URP326 - Neighbourhood Planning and Design.
Definitions and Perceptions of Urban Design; Urban
Design Approaches; Current Issues of Urban Design;
Urban Design User Requirements; The Concept of
Neighbourhood; Neighbourhood Development; Layout
Planning Concerns; Layout Planning Principles and
Guidelines; Designing with Nature.
URP327 - Infrastructure Planning & Management.
Definitions, reasons for studying infrastructure planning,
role of physical planner, infrastructure and public health
linkages, infrastructure and shelter linkages; onsite
excreta disposal systems, offsite excreta disposal systems;
wastewater technology; solid waste management;
storm water management; water demand supply and
distribution; power demand, supply and distribution;
Telecommunication infrastructure. Financing and cost
recovery of sanitation, wastewater, solid waste, power
and water supply services.
URP 328 - Professional Training/Internship II (8 weeks).
The main aim of this course is to provide students with
an opportunity to put planning concepts and methods
learned in the classroom into practice in a realistic
professional setting. Typically, the internship will take
place during the long vacation for a continuous period
of 8 weeks. To:
• Gain practical field experience on the 		
planning profession;
• Develop an understanding of the 		
administrative requirements of the profession;
Share insights gained from internship with staff and
other students.

URP423 - Gender and Planning.
The course will explore ‘gender’ as an analytical tool and
a proxy for decision making and accessing resources;
gender roles, contracts and relationships in society;
Gender analysis, auditing, mainstreaming and proofing;
Gendered domestic and public spaces; Gendered
inequalities and social exclusion;
Urbanisation (modernisation) and women’s
empowerment; and approaches for mainstreaming
and promoting women’s participation in development
planning.
URP420 – Planning Legislation.
History of planning law will be studied and particularly
the British type of legislation that influenced planning
here in Botswana. The relevance of the Town and
Country Planning Act of 1977, Urban Development
Standards 1992, the Development Control Code 1995
and Physical Planning policies within the contemporary
planning framework. How efficient are the planning
law organisations; It explores the relationship between
the planning legislation and other auxiliary statutes
that have a bearing on land use planning, development,
environmental concerns and land management’s
namely Environmental Impact Assessment Bill, the
Building Control Act, land Survey Act and the Tribal land
Act. Existing and potential conflicts would be identified
between the Town and Country Planning Act and the
above mentioned statutes and suggestions in class as
amelioration measures.
URP421 Planning and Management for Climate Change.
The major aim of the course is to familiarise students
with theoretical underpinning of climate change and
its mitigation through application of sustainable spatial
planning practices. The course focuses on (i) mapping
the challenges of climate change: adaptation, mitigation
and vulnerability, spatial planning responses, appropriate
development patterns, transportation policies, planning
challenges for countries in dry and arid region; (ii)
strategic planning responses: limits of urbanization, newgrowth, smart growth, new urbanism, new regionalisms,
water and land management; and (iii) implementation,
governance and engagement: use of climate change
scenarios, integrated assessment and local decision
making, planning fro green infrastructure, use of
renewable energy sources, municipalities responses, etc.
URP 422 - Urban Regeneration & Renewal.
Classification of settlements; Need for urban renewal
and settlement upgrading; Slums – causes and effects;
advantages and disadvantages of slum clearance; in situ
upgrading of slums: theory and practices, advantages
and disadvantages; public participation in urban
renewal settlement upgrading; building partnerships
with private sector and communities. Plot regularization
and service provision; private, community and state
partnerships in regeneration and renewal.
URP424 - Land and Property Management.
Overview of land and property development process.
Feasibility and site analysis (allowable use of site, site
analysis and site selection, rezoning). Conceptual design;
Schematic design (base map preparation, refinement
of previous assumptions). Final design (suburban street
design, storm drainage design, design of storm water
management facilities, floodplain studies, grading and
earthwork, wastewater collection, water distribution,
wastewater treatment, water supply and treatment,
erosion and sediment control, contract documents
and specifications, construction cost estimating). Plan
submission and permitting (subdivision submissions,
plan submissions, review and approval process,

79

environmental permits, etc.).Construction (construction
stakeout surveys, building permits, certificates of
occupancy, etc.).
URP 425 – Contracting and Planning Project
Management Contracting: initiating an urban (land
development) project, preparing a detailed project
brief and ToR, ToR submission, project management/
organising people. Introduction to planning project
management: professional development, what is project
management, planning staff, motivation, planning
managers. The process of project management: the
project management life cycle, the work cycle, the
business context, building the business case. Case studies
and Perspectives: local, regional and international case
studies; perspectives.
URP428 - Urban Governance and Management.
The natures of urban governance, and urban
governance. History of urban governance in
Botswana and elsewhere. Overview of trends in urban
governance in Botswana and elsewhere. Actors in urban
governance: citizens and electors; municipal employees;
elected officials; senior governments and special
interests. Issues in urban governance: finances; land-use
planning; transport and other infrastructure; economic
and social development; energy and environment.
Prospects for the future of urban governance.
Intersecting these topics will be several critical matters
including size of the municipality, governmental
framework (e.g, single-tier, two-tier), involvement of
municipal agencies, and societal/economic context
(e.g., command vs. market economy; rich vs. poor).
Theoretical content will be introduced as appropriate
but will not be emphasized.
URP426 - Planning Implementation Techniques.
Introduction to plan implementation: importance, timing,
stakeholders, roles and responsibilities; Implementation
techniques categories: non-regulatory (special purpose
planning, education, planning or zoning administrator
hiring, etc.), regulatory (zoning, land division and sub
division control, site plan review, design standards,
performance standards, etc.), voluntary (conservation
easement, purchase of development rights, donation
of land, etc.), incentive based (transfer of development
rights, density bonus, tax increment financing, tax
incentives, revenue sharing, etc.). Controlling growth
using Smart code: the nature and role of code, form based
code, transect-based code; Monitoring: programmes and
projects impacts, strengths, weaknesses, budgeting and
review.
(e.g., command vs. market economy; rich vs. poor).
Theoretical content will be introduced as appropriate but
will not be emphasized.
URP426 - Planning Implementation Techniques.
Introduction to plan implementation: importance, timing,
stakeholders, roles and responsibilities; Implementation
techniques categories: non-regulatory (special purpose
planning, education, planning or zoning administrator
hiring, etc.), regulatory (zoning, land division and sub
division control, site plan review, design standards,
performance standards, etc.), voluntary (conservation
easement, purchase of development rights, donation
of land, etc.), incentive based (transfer of development
rights, density bonus, tax increment financing, tax
incentives, revenue sharing, etc.). Controlling growth
using Smart code: the nature and role of code, form based
code, transect-based code; Monitoring: programmes
and projects impacts, strengths, weaknesses, budgeting
and review. special environments, restoration, facility
planning, master planning and management planning.

URP503 – Integrated Housing Studies.
Housing: a beyond shelter definition. Effects of social
exclusion and unequal access to adequate housing.
Housing and the sustainable livelihoods framework.
Role of housing in socioeconomic development.
Employment from housing and related sectors.
Overcoming gender, behavioural, occupational,
social, cultural and legal barriers to house ownership.
Empowering youths, women and the poor through on
job training and skills development in housing. Towards
a partnership between the state, private sector and local
communities. Sustainable housing design, finances,
construction and maintenance. Review of ‘best practice’
cases.
URP 504 – Healthy City Planning.
Healthy City Planning explores the link between
urban planning and health. This is traced to the public
health origins of urban planning which somehow
got overshadowed by other planning concerns. The
incidence of diseases in cities in developing countries
provides a challenge to which urban planning has to
respond.
URP505 - Integrated Development Planning.
The Concept and Theory of integrated development
planning. Principles of Development Planning. The
process of preparing an integrated development plan.
Analysis (survey, analysis of issues and forecasting
the future and plan making). The impact and policy
implications of the concepts of “integrated sustainable
development” and “sustainable human settlements”
for a municipal/local area. The legal implications and
principles of the concepts of “developmental local
government” and `integrated development planning`
for governance in a municipal/local area. Institutional
capacity in Integrated Development Planning (IDP)
processes. Implementation techniques of IDPs
URP506 – Regional and Rural Planning and Development.
This course provides guidance for spatial planners on
how to meet the economic, social and environmental
challenges that climate change raises for urban and
regional development. It brings together some of the
recent research and scholarly ideas on the role of spatial
planning in combating climate change. It addresses
both mitigation measures for reducing greenhouse
gas emissions and adaptation to the effects of climate
change. It provides an overview of emerging practice,
with analysis of the drivers of policy change and practical
implementation of mitigation measures, plans, designs,
programmes and strategies. It scopes planning issues
and opportunities at different spatial scales, drawing
on both the African and international experiences and
highlighting the need to link global and local responses
to shared risks and opportunities.
URP507 - Comparative Planning.
Emergence and diffusion of contemporary spatial
planning. Indigenous planning. Contested and
negotiated planning imposition. Adjusted, modified
and invented planning. Undiluted and selective
planning borrowing. Typologies of planning systems.
Types of spatial planners. The variety of planning
cultures. Review of planning systems in developed and
developing world. The governance of spatial planning
towards a global planning culture.
URP508 - Administrative and Policy Planning.
Introduction to Public Policy and Administrative
Governance. Public Bureaucracy in Theory and Practice.
Policy Formation: The Institutions and Processes of
Political Governance. Administrative Governance: The

Challenge of Policy Implementation. The Role and
Influence of Non-state Actors in Policymaking and
Administrative Governances. Ethics in Administrative
Governance: The Challenge of Ensuring Democratic
Accountability in Public Administration. Social Diversity
and the Question of “Difference” in Policy-making and
Administrative Governance. Paradigms of Governance:
Policy-making and Administrative Governance from the
Administrative Welfare State to the Neo-liberal Stat.
URP 510 - Planning Support Systems.
Introduction of PSS concept: PSS systems progress,
predictions & speculations; planning movements,
concept of planner’s tool box of digital tools and
applications; visualization and spatial decision making;
The Regional Scale: cellular urban modeling; simulating
regional futures; What If? A new tool for new planning;
Moving from Region to City: an overview of UrbanSim;
Community Viz; INDEX; PSS in practice: planner’s
perspective; what planners can achieve with PSS.
URP511 - Development Impacts Analysis.
Overview and historical development of DIA. The DIA
current practice and usage, the DIA decision making
process, and how to develop an effective DIA team.
The weaknesses in the existing DIA process, and its
likely future development. DIA scoping, information
gathering and assimilation and technical report writing.
Identification of project characteristics, prediction
of impacts and significance assessment. Available
mitigation techniques are available. Participation
in a site visit and studying of real-life-case studies
Review DIA statements and DIA post-auditing and
developmental management methods.
URP512 - Public Participation & Negotiations Techniques.
Public Participation defined- rationale for participationSherry Arnstein’s Ladder of Citizen Participation
and adaptations; Theoretical basis for participationGood Governance Model- liberal democratic
basis- governance debate: Participation as a Right,
International conventions and participation: Agenda
21, ILO Convention 169, Rights Based Approaches ;
Methods of eliciting Participation in Physical Planning,
Participatory approaches- Participatory Appraisal – PRA
RRA- application to urban planning- physical planningCommunity Action Planning, NGOs, CBOs and civil
society organisations as agents of participation; Limits
to Community Participation: State-Civil society relations
in Botswana- Information sharing and dissemination.
URP513 - Community Planning Methods & Scenarios.
General principles: agendas, commitments,
transparency, process ownerships, initiatives, context,
facilitation, etc. Methods: action planning, workshops
and schemes, forums, gaming, charrettes, reviews,
reconnaissance trips, task forces, user groups, soap
boxes, environment shops, etc. Scenarios: community
centre, derelict sites, new and old neighbourhoods,
regeneration areas, village revival, heritage sites,
environmental art projects, inner city, industrial districts,
etc. Formats and checklists: strategy & workshop
planner, action planning, progress monitoring,
evaluations, equipment and supplies, initiatives, etc.
URP515 Supervised Dissertation/ Research Project
It should be based on selected topic from A, B, or
C. specialist’s streams. It should be of a standard
that merits publication. How to develop a research
proposal into a dissertation will include: proposition,
contextual review and bibliography, strategy, specific
data gathering, analysis, alternatives, proposal
selection, conclusion, implementation, self-evaluation,
compilation and editing, organisation of dissertation

80

and writing/ prose style.
Bachelor of Real Estate
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Degree programme shall be as
stipulated in General Academic Regulation 20.20
Applicants for admission to level 100 must have
a minimum Grade of C in English Language, and
Mathematics. Preference will be given to candidates
with a minimum of grade C in Accounts, Commerce,
Geography, History, Development Studies, Design and
Technology and any other cognate subjects.
Admission into Level 200 of the Bachelor of Real
Estate Degree Programme shall be as stipulated in the
General Admissions Regulations. Applicants who are
in possession of an appropriate Diploma or equivalent
in Land Management, Land Administration, Estate
Management, Geomatics, Land Surveying, Cartography,
GIS or any other cognate subjects and have a GPA of at
least 3.0 or its equivalent may be admitted directly into
Level 200 but will take Level 100 courses if necessary.
Programme Structure
The programme is a single major that will extend over
8 semesters of full time studies. It shall be consist of
four core areas of property management, valuation,
marketing and agency, investment and appraisal and
support subjects (economics, law, construction and
town planning).
Level 100
Semester 1
Core courses
STA101
Mathematics for Business & Social
Sciences I (3, C)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3, C)
RES101
LAW131

Introduction to Real Estate (3, C)
Introduction to Law (3, C)

General courses
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills (2,GEC)
COM131 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3, GEC)
Semester 2
Core courses
STA102
Mathematics for Business & Social
Sciences II (3, C, Pre-req STA101)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3, C, Pre-req
ECO111)
ARB127 Building and Materials (3, C, Pre-req None)
RES102
Introduction to Valuation (3, C, Pre-req
RES101)
General courses
ICT122
Computing and Information Skills (2, GEC,
Pre-req ICT121)
COM132 Academic and Professional
Communication (3, GEC, Pre-req COM131)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core courses
RES200
Land Economics I (3, C, Pre-req RES101)
LAW233 Contract Law (4, C, Pre-req LAW131)
ARB217 Architecture Drawing Techniques (3, C, Prereq ARB127)
URP110
Introduction to Planning & built 		
Environment (3c, Pre-req None)
CGB111
Geomatics (4c, Pre-req None)
Semester 4

Core courses
RES210
Land Economics II (3, C, Pre-req RES200)
RES201
Principles and Methods of Valuation (3, C,
Pre-req RES102)
CGB321 Introduction to Land Administration (3, C,
Pre-req RES200)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3, C, Pre-req
None)
LAW201 Introduction to Property Law (3, C, Pre-req
LAW233) Elective (3, E, Pre-req None)

skills; facility planning; building services management
and maintenance.
RES415
BLM321
RES317
RES402

Facilities Planning and Management (3, C,
Pre-req RES315)
Tribal Land Management (3, O, Pre-req
CGB413)
Risk and Value Management (3, O, Pre-req
RES311)
Business Planning and Entrepreneurship (3,
C, Pre-req RES310)

Winter session
RES214
Internship I (3, C, Pre-req None)
COURSE LISTING
Level 300
Semester 5
Core courses
RES300
Housing Economics and Policies (3, C, Prereq RES210)
RES301
Real Estate Marketing and Agency (3, C,
Pre-req RES210)
RES302
Applied Valuation I (3, C, Pre-req RES201)
RES303
ARB312
RES315

Property Development and Finance (3, C,
Pre-req RES210)
Building Services I (3, C, Pre-req ARB217)
Building Maintenance (3, C, Pre-req
ARB217)

Semester 6
Core courses
RES310
Property Management (3, C, Pre-req
RES300)
RES311
RES312
RES313
BLM323
CGB322

Property Investment & Appraisal (3, C, Prereq RES303)
Property Conveyance and Disposition (3, C,
Pre-req LAW201)
Applied Valuation II (3, C, Pre-req RES302)
Project Planning and Implementation (3, C,
Pre-req RES303)
Principles of GIS (3, C, Pre-req CGB111)

Winter session
RES314
Internship II (3, C, Pre-req RES214)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core courses
CGB413 Advanced Land Administration (3, C, Pre-req
CGB321)
RES400
Investment and Valuation Project (3, C, Prereq RES301)
RES401
Computer Application to Real Estate (3, C,
Pre-req 303)
RES403
Research Methodology (3, C, Pre-req
RES301)
BLM411
Alternative Dispute Resolution (3, C, Pre-req
CGB321)
BLM313 Remote Sensing for Land Management (3,
O, Pre-req CGB322)
RES416
Property Taxation (3, O, Pre-req RES311)
Semester 8
Core courses
RES410
Dissertation (6, C, Pre-req RES403)
RES411
Business and Professional Ethics (3, C, Prereq RES310)
RES415 Facility Planning and Management
The course provides students with the basic foundation
of facilities management in terms of building
performance; legal framework regarding facilities
management and property management; management

FOR ALL OTHER COURSES NOT OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT PLEASE CONSULT THE RELEVANT
DEPARTMENT FOR THE SYNOPSIS
RES101 – Introduction to Real Estate
The course is meant to introduce students to the
Real Estate profession with a view to enabling them
understand the definition, origin, growth, nature and
scope of the Real Estate industry; types of properties
and interests in land; basic estate accounts; duties
of the Estate Manager and Real Estate Portfolio
Management.
RES102 – Introduction to Valuation
The course is meant to introduce students to valuation
and value concepts. The course will enable students
to appreciate the role of a property surveyor and to
understand the purposes for which property valuations
are required; the factors that affect property values as
well as the mathematical principles underlying property
valuation.
RES200 – Land Economics I
The course covers major aspects of land as an economic
resource. The objective is to teach students the
processes of land market and resource allocation in an
economy. Concepts of economics introduced in Year I
are, in this course related to real property.
RES201 – Principles and Methods of Valuation
The course gives students a detailed understanding
of the theory, principles and application of the
conventional methods of valuation as well as modified
approaches. The valuation introduced in Year I (RES102)
is treated to a greater depth to include valuation table
construction and application.
RES210 – Land Economics II
The course examines theories propounded on
distribution of urban land uses as well as the evolution
and growth of urban areas. It is meant to develop
students understanding of the factors, which influence
the growth of urban areas and the problems that
accompany them.
RES214 – Internship
Internship at the end of this semester is devoted to
practical training through field or industry attachment.
Students are attached to an organisation to undertake
industrial training under the supervision of a Field
Supervisor will be responsible for overseeing the
students’ training at the work-place while Internship
Supervisors from the University undertake targeted
visits. The essence is to provide practical training to
students so as to enable them acquire practical skills
and to enable students to integrate the theoretical
knowledge learnt in class with real life situations.
Furthermore it is to acquaint students with the

81

organisation and nature of work-places and the
requisite human relations to enable them work
harmoniously with others at work-places.
RES300 – Housing Economics and Policies
The course will equip students with housing economics
and policy related matters in terms of the dynamics of
the housing market; housing finance; governmental
intervention and programmes or housing policy
affecting the housing market and their objectives and
impacts; zoning and land use regulation, rent and price
controls as well as formal and informal housing.
RES301 – Real Estate Marketing and Agency
The course provides a detailed treatise on the process
involved in the disposal of real property and to
understand the professional liability arising from the
work of an estate agent. The course covers such aspects
as property marketing; marketing planning; marketing
strategies; market research as well as Estate Agency.
RES302 – Applied Valuation I
The aim of this course is to provide a platform for
the application of the valuation principles and tools
of analysis for a wide range of purposes. It offers
knowledge on contemporary valuation approaches and
skills on valuation of special types of properties.
RES303 – Property Development & Finance
The aim of this course is to provide students with
an understanding of why people invest in landed
properties and how they make such investment
decision. The course will cover in detail the various
stages and requirements in the property development
process, its economic context and alternative sources
of funding. It will also outline different types of risks
investors have to contend with and the available
techniques in assessing the risks.
RES310 – Property Management
This course provides and equips students with
the general principles, knowledge and skills of the
practice of estate management, including basics of
estate management such as key elements of leases,
types of estate management and duties and roles of
property managers. It deals with systems of property
management; estate policy formulation and estate
accounts.
RES311 – Property Investment and Appraisal
The course provides students with knowledge about
property portfolio analyses and the appraisal of
property investment schemes. It offers students the
opportunity of application of theories of property
investment analysis at both, the individual property
level as well as the portfolio level. Furthermore it
enables students to acquire the theory and practice of
fund management techniques.
RES312 – Property Conveyance and Disposition
The course is designed to expose students to
conveyancing and disposition of interests in property
together with the various aspects of interests involved.
It deals with the law of landlord and tenant; meaning
and types of securities including mortgage, charge,
pledge, pawn, lien; transfers and sales of land as well as
land and document registration.
RES313 – Applied Valuation II
The aim of this course is to offer a detailed coverage
of valuations done for specific purposes together
with those provided for in legislation or arising from

a contractual duty. It provides skills in the application
of valuation principles within the provision of statutes
relating to land and property acquisition, rent controls
legislation, ratings, principles of plant and machinery
valuation, sectional titles, compensation, and third party
interests in land.
RES315 – Building Maintenance
This course provides students with basic knowledge
of building maintenance in real estate in terms of
the different types of maintenance; principles of
maintenance planning and execution; and building
failure diagnosis.
RES314 – Internship
Internship at the end of this semester is devoted to
practical training through field or industry attachment.
Students are attached to an organization to undertake
industrial training under the supervision of a Field
Supervisor will be responsible for overseeing the
students’ training at the work-place while Internship
Supervisors from the University undertake targeted
visits. The essence is to provide practical training to
students so as to enable them acquire practical skills
and to enable students to integrate the theoretical
knowledge learnt in class with real life situations.
Furthermore it is to acquaint students with the
organization and nature of work-places and the
requisite human relations to enable them work
harmoniously with others at work-places.
RES416 Property Taxation
The course aims at introducing students to various
taxes levied on property and the impact of these taxes
on property investment and development. It introduces
students to Basic concepts and purposes of Taxation;
Principles of an Optimal Tax System; Essentials of
a good Tax system. Reasons for property taxation;
Types of property taxes (including land tax, property
rates, Capital Gains Tax, Estate Duty and Stamp Duty);
Evolution of Property Taxation in Botswana; Assessment
and calculation of property tax; Appeals; Billing and
Collection; Effects of property taxation on property
investment and development; and Capital and tax
incentives in property development.
RES317 Value and Risk Management
The course deals with the essence of risk in real estate
investment appraisal. It covers risk management
throughout the construction project life cycle,
managing risk at feasibility, planning and design and
at construction stages; Risk analysis and cost benefit
analysis; sensitivity analysis; managing and measuring
risk by the variability of returns, covariance and the
correlation coefficient; mean-variance rule; measuring
the return in real estate investments; improving riskreturn relationship by diversification; the concept of
an efficient portfolio; correlation and the gains from
diversification; capital asset pricing model (CAPM);
systematic and non-systematic risk; the characteristic
market line, capital asset pricing model and application
real estate and other investments appraisal
RES400 – Investment/Valuation Project
The essence of the course is to develop skills on
how to approach investment and/or valuation
project by applying acquired knowledge in property
development, construction, disposal, management and
valuation in practical situations, in combination with
other disciplines, and with emphasis on procedures,
monitoring and report writing.

RES401 – Computer Application in Real Estate
The course offers students mastery in the application
of modern ICT in the spheres of property development,
facilities management, valuation and the real estate
business in general with an emphasis on the “hands-on”
approach, particularly in the areas of property valuation,
property management, and real estate investment
analysis and estate agency.
RES402 – Business Planning and Entrepreneurship
The course is meant to impart knowledge on the
rationale, process and the dynamics of the planning
function in business as well as introduce students to
the different types of planning and their applications
in an enterprise context. Students will be exposed to
knowledge on how to identify opportunities in real
estate, screen such opportunities, develop a business
plan, seek funding for implementing the plan, set
up and run the enterprise successfully. Students will
be expected to be familiar with the domestic and
international business environment in which real estate
entrepreneurs operate.
RES403 – Research Methodology
The objective of the course is to guide the students
on research methods, data collection techniques and
analysis so as to prepare them for the projects and
dissertation to be carried out in the final year of study.
RES410 – Dissertation
Final year students will be expected to have acquired
knowledge of the programme as an integrated whole
and should be able to write and submit a dissertation
or project. The dissertation or project should be
based on both analytical and empirical components
in addition to descriptive material. Topics should be
selected by students and approved by the Department.
A relevant academic staff member will be assigned to
supervise each student dissertation. The dissertation
will have to be presented orally to a Departmental
Examination Panel.

Engineering (Civil) Degree shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Bachelor of Engineering (Civil) Degree
shall be as stipulated in the Faculty Special Regulation
21.10.
The normal minimum requirements for admission to
level 200 for a degree program shall be satisfactory
completion of level 100 of the Bachelor of Science
(General) degree of the Faculty of Science or equivalent
institution with at least C grades in Mathematics,
Chemistry and Physics. Applicants in possession of
an appropriate ‘A’ level qualification with at least C
grades in Mathematics and at least one of: Physics and
Chemistry may be admitted directly to Level 200 of
the programme. Applicants in possession of a relevant
Diploma may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the
degree programme.
Semester 5 courses for Civil Engineering
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
CCB313
Surveying (Core, 3 credits, pre-req. MAT292)
CCB331
Analysis of Structures (Core, 3 credits, pre-r
eq. CCB241)
CCB332 Materials in Construction (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req. CCB231)
CCB333 Fluid Mechanics for Civil Engineers (Core, 3
credits, pre-req. CCB232)
MAT391 Engineering Mathematics 111 (Core, 3
credits, pre-req. MAT292)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science* (Elective, 3
credits)
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration*
(Elective, 3 credits)
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts an
Principles* (Elective, 3 credits)
SOC334 Sociology of Development* (Elective, 3
credits)
*Choose any 1 of the courses with asterisk

RES411 – Business and Professional Ethics
The course is designed to enable students have a
broad understanding of business ethics such that
the students appreciate the need to apply ethical
behaviour in the conduct of the real estate business.
The course is intended to equip students with skills and
insights into professional practices including ways of
approaching people and problems, practical advice, tips
and techniques and effective communication skills with
colleagues and clients.

DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL
ENGINEERING
Introduction
The Department of Civil Engineering offers the following
programmes:
•
•
•
•

Bachelor of Engineering (Civil)
Bachelor of Engineering (Mining)
Bachelor of Geomatics
Bachelor of Engineering (Mineral)

Special Regulations for Bachelor of Engineering (Civil)
Preamble:
Subject to the provisions of General Regulations 000
and 200 and the Faculty Special Regulation 21.0, the
following Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of

82

Bachelor of Geomatics Course Listings
CGB412 Spatial Data Modelling & Analysis
This course introduces students to the modern
computer-based approaches employed to represent
and manage spatial data and information for survey
and geographic information systems applications. The
course concentrates on spatial data structures, data
standards, and spatial data modelling: 2D data models,
2.5 data models, 3D data models, 4D data models,
building information modelling, geostatistics and case
studies on spatial data modelling.
Programme Structure
The Programme for the Degree in Civil Engineering will
be a single major programme that will extend over 10
semesters of full-time study. It shall contain 1 subject
called Civil Engineering consisting of courses shown
below. The curriculum for Levels 100 and 200 shall be as
stipulated in Faculty Special Regulation 21.30
Level 300
Semester 6
Core Courses (all 3 credits)
CCB334 Geology for Civil Engineers (Core, 3 credits)
CCB341
Reinforced Concrete Design (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req. CCB331)
CCB342 Soil Mechanics (Core, 3 credits, pre-req.
CCB241)
CCB343 Hydraulics (Core, 3 credits, pre-req. CCB333)
LAW253 Foundation of Engineering Law (Core, 3

MAT392

credits)
Engineering Mathematics 1V (Optional, 3
credits, MAT391)

Level 400
Semester 7
CCB431
Structural Steel Design (Core, 3 credits, prereq. CCB331)
CCB432 Geotechnical Engineering 1 (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req. CCB342)
CCB433 Engineering Hydrology (Core, 3 credits, prereq. CCB343)
CCB435 Highway Engineering (Core, 3 credits, prereq. CCB313)
CGB311
Engineering Surveying (Core, 3 credits, prereq. CCB313)
Semester 8
Level 400
CCB 441 Principles of Civil Engineering Construction
(Core, 3 credits, pre-req. CCB332)
CCB442 Geotechnical Engineering 11 (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req. CCB432)
CCB443 Water supply Engineering (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req. CCB343)
CCB444 Traffic Engineering (Core, 3 credits, pre-req.
CCB435)
CCB445 Wastewater Engineering and Management
(Core, 3 credits, pre-req. CCB343)
ITB440
Industrial Attachment (Core, 4 credits, prereq. Proceed result at Level 400)
Semester 9
Level 500
CCB 531 Research Project (Core, 6 credits, pre-req.
ITB440)
CCB535 Environmental Management (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req. CCB443)
MMB536 Engineering and Project Management (Core,
3 credits)
CCB533 Transportation Engineering* (Optional, 3
credits, pre-req. CCB444)
CCB534 Prestressed Concrete Design* (Optional, 3
credits, pre-req. CCB341)
CCB536 Foundations on Difficult Soils* (Optional, 3
credits, pre-req. CCB442)
Semester 10
Level 500
CCB541
Design Project (Core, 6 credits, pre-req. Level
400 Civil)
CCB542 Measurement and Specifications for Civil
Engineers (Core, 3 credits, pre-req. CCB441)
IMB 523 Professional Ethics and Practice (Core, 3
credits)
CCB543 Masonry and Timber Design* (Optional, 3
credits, pre-req. CCB341)
CCB544 Dam Design* (Optional, 3 credits, pre-req.
CCB343)
*Choose any 1 of the courses with asterisk
Special Regulationns for Bachelor of Engineering
(Mining)

at least C grades in Mathematics, Chemistry and Physics.
Applicants in possession of an appropriate ‘A’ level
qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics and
at least one of: Physics and Chemistry may be admitted
directly to Level 200 of the programme.
Applicants in possession of an appropriate Diploma
may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the degree
programme.
Duration of the Programme
The duration of the programme shall be: A minimum of
10 and a maximum of 12 semesters on a full-time basis.
Degree Structure
The curriculum for Level 100 shall be stipulated in the
Faculty Special Regulation 21.20.
Level 200 Mining Engineering shall consist of the
following courses:
Semester 3
MAT291
Engineering Mathematics I,
(Core, Prerequisites MAT 111, MAT 122,
3 Credits)
CCB231
Materials Science for Engineers, (Core,
3, Prerequisites MAT 122, CHEM 102)
CCB232 Engineering Mechanics: Statics, (Core,
Prerequisites MAT122, PHY 122, 3 Credits)
MIN 211 Introduction to Mining Engineering ,
(Core, 3 Credits)
EEB231
Electrical Fundamentals I, (Core, 		
Prerequisites MAT122, PHY122, 3)
MMB231
Engineering and Computer Aided Drawing,
(Core, 3)
GEC 2xx Approved GEC
Semester 4
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics II,
(Core, Prerequisites MAT 291, 3 Credits)
CCB241
Mechanics of Materials,
(Core, Prerequisites CCB 231, 3 Credits)
MIN221 Mine Safety & Health,
(Core, Prerequisites MIN211, 3 Credits)
EEB241
Electrical Fundamentals II, (Core, 3 Credits)
MMB241 Dynamics of Particles, (Core, 3 Credits)
GEC 2xx Approved GEC, (Core, 2 Credits)
Winter session
MIN200 Mine Tour I (Winter, 1)
Level 300 Mining Engineering shall consist of
following courses:

Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Bachelor of Engineering (Mining
Engineering) Degree shall be as stipulated in the Faculty
Special Regulations 21.10.

Semester 5
MIN314 Geology for Engineers, (Core, 2 Credits)
MIN313 Introduction to Mineral Processing,
(Core, 3 Credits)
MIN316 Mining and the Environment,
(Core, Prerequisites MIN 211, 3 Credits)
SOC334* Sociology of Development,
(Option, 3 Credits)
POL306* International Political Economy,
(Option, 3 Credits)
LAW215* Foundations of Business Law ,
(Option, 3 Credits)
*Two Approved 3 Credit Options

The normal minimum requirements for admission to level
200 for a degree program shall be satisfactory completion
of level 100 of the Bachelor of Science (General) degree
of the Faculty of Science or equivalent institution with

Semester 6
MIN326 Mine Surveying , (Core, 3 Credits)
IMB425
Operations Research I, (Core, 3 Credits)
MIN325 Mine Supervision and Management,

83

CCB322
POL305*
PAD202*
LAW253*

(Core, 3 Credits)
Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulics,
(Core, Prerequisites CCB 212, 3)
Politics of Southern Africa, (Option,
3 Credits)
Public Administration in Botswana,
(Option, 3 Credits)
Foundation of Engineering Law,
(Option, 3 Credits)

*Two Approved 3 Credit Options
Level 400 Mining Engineering shall consist of
following courses:
Semester 7
MIN 411 Rock Drilling , (Core, Prerequisites
MIN 211, 3 Credits)
MIN 412 Rock Mechanics, (Core,
Prerequisites MIN 211, 3 Credits Credits)
MIN413 Surface Mining – Hard Rock,
(Core, Prerequisites MIN 211, 3)
MIN 414 Underground Mining – Hard Rock,(Core,
Prerequisites MIN 211, 3 Credits)
MIP 413 Extractive Metallurgy, (Core,
Prerequisites MIP 313, 3 Credits)
IMB 515 Operations Research II, (Core, 3 Credits)
		
Semester 8
MIN421 Mine Ventilation (Core, Prerequisites MIN
211, 3 Credits)
MIP425
Mine Management (Core, Prerequisites MIN
325,3 Credits)
MIN423 Rock Blasting (Core, Prerequisites MIN 411,
3 Credits)
MIP424
Mining Industry Economics
(Core, Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3 Credits 3)
MIN425 Coal Mining (Core, Prerequisites MIN 211,
3 Credits)
MIN400 Mine Tour II (Winter, 1 Credit)
Semester 9		
MIN 510 Project I, (Core, 3 Credits)
MIN511
Specialised Blasting Applications,
(Core, Prerequisites MIN 211, 3 		
Credits)
MIN514 Surface Mine Planning and Design,
(Core, Prerequisites MIN 211, 3 Credits)
MIP515
Mineral Processing Plant Project 		
Development (Option, Pre-requisite MIN
313, 3 Credits)
MIN516 Mining Geostatistics ,
(Core, Prerequisites MAT291, CC314,
3Credits)
			
Semester 10		
MIN 520 Project II (Core, 3 Credits)
MIN521* Material Handling in Mines
(Core, Prerequisites MIN 211, 3Credits)
MIN522 Mine Power and Drainage
(Core, Prerequisites MIN 211, 3 Credits)
MIP523
Tailings and Wastewater Disposal
(Core, 3 Credits)		
MIN523 Underground Mine Planning
and Design(Core, Prerequisites
MIN 413, 3 Credits)
			
Assessment
A course may consist entirely of fieldwork, project work,
practical work, design, and seminars. In addition to work
during the semester, a subject may include prescribed
fieldwork or assignments during the vacation periods.
			

Continuous assessment in courses shall be based on
tests and/or design, assignments, and where applicable
laboratory reports and field reports. The ratio of
continuous assessment to formal examination shall be
2:3. Overall performance in a course shall be as specified
UB. Continuous assessment in courses shall be based on
tests and/or design, assignments, and where applicable
laboratory reports and field reports.
			
The ratio of continuous assessment to formal
examination shall be 2:3 12.53 Overall performance in
a course shall be as specified in the General Regulation
00.84.
			
Final Examinations		
Where a course includes a written final examination, a
course with a credit value of 3 or more shall be
examined by an end of semester examination of
duration 2 hours, and 1 hour for a course with less than
3 credits. To uphold and maintain quality assurance, all
tests, examination papers and scripts will be internally
moderated by qualified staff.
Supplementary Examinations
Supplementary examinations shall be conducted in
accordance with existing university policy. A student
who fails a core or pre-requisite or co-requisite course
shall retake the course when offered again. A student
who has failed an optional/elective/general education
course may retake the course or its equivalent.
A student who fails a core or pre-req. or co-requisite
course shall retake the course when offered again.
A student who has failed an optional/elective/
general education course may retake the course or its
equivalent.
Progression from Semester to Semester
General Regulation 00.90 shall apply.
Award of the Degree
The UB General Regulation for awarding the degree
shall apply. Classification of the degree shall be in
accordance with the provisions of General Regulation
20.4 (Degree classification).

Special Regulations for Bachelor of Engineering in
Mineral Engineering
Preamble:
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations
00.0 and 20.00, the following Faculty Special
Regulations for the Bachelor of Engineering (Mineral)
Degree shall apply.
Degree Programmes
The following degree programme is offered:
Special Regulationns for Bachelor of Engineering
(Mineral)
B.Eng. (Mineral) Degree
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Bachelor of Engineering (Mineral
Engineering) Degree shall be as stipulated in the Faculty
Special Regulations 21.10.
The normal minimum requirements for admission to
level 200 for a degree program shall be satisfactory
completion of level 100 of the Bachelor of Science
(General) degree of the Faculty of Science or equivalent
institution with at least C grades in Mathematics,
Chemistry and Physics.
Applicants in possession of an appropriate ‘A’ level
qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics and
at least one of: Physics and Chemistry may be admitted
directly to Level 200 of the programme.
Applicants in possession of a relevant Diploma may
be admitted directly into Level 200 of the degree
programme.
Duration of the Programme
The duration of the programme shall be:
A minimum of 10 and a maximum of 12 semesters on a
full-time basis.
Degree Structure
The curriculum for Level 100 shall be stipulated in the
Faculty Special Regulation 21.20.
Level 200 Mineral Engineering shall consist of the
following courses:

Preamble
Subject to the provisions of General Regulations000
and 100 the following Professional Training Regulations
shall apply to students on the Bachelor of Engineering
(Mining Engineering) programme.

Semester 3
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics I (Core, 3)
CCB231

Materials Science for Engineers (Core, 3
credits, pre-req PHY122)

Structure
1.1 A student shall undergo a 1 week Mine Tour after
level 200 (MIN 200) and another mine tour after level
400 (MIN 400).

CCB232

Engineering Mechanics: Statics (Core, 3
credits, pre-req MAT122, PHY112)
Introduction to Mining Engineering (Core, 3)

MIN211
EEB231

1.3 During the Professional Training students shall be
subjected to such codes, procedures, laws, rules, and
other regulations as applicable to the mining industry/
organisation.
Assessment
2.1 Assessment of the Mine Tour shall be by submission
of a written report.
2.2 A student who has an incomplete grade shall be
allowed to complete Professional Training at a time
recommended by the Faculty.
Repeating Mine Tour
A student who fails to meet the requirements of Mine
Tour shall be required to repeat the tour at a time
recommended by the Faculty.

MMB231
CHE211
CHE213

Electrical Fundamentals I (Core, 3 credits,
pre-req PHY122, MAT122)
Engineering and Computer-Aided Drawing
(Core, 3)
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry (Core,
2)
Analytical Chemistry Lab (Core, 1)

Semester 4
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics II (Core, 3)
CCB241
Mechanics of Materials (Core, 3 pre-req
CCB232)
MIN221 Introduction to Mine Safety & Health(Core,
3)
EEB241
Electrical Fundamentals (Core, 3 Credits)
MMB241 Dynamics of Particles (Core, 3)
GEC258 Art and Science (2)

84

Winter session
MIP 220 Professional Training (Core, 4 Credits 8
weeks)
Level 300 Mineral Engineering shall consist of the
following courses:
Semester 5		
CCB314
Engineering Geology (Core, 2)
MIN313 Introduction to Mineral Processing (Core, 3)
MIN316 Mining and the Environment (Core, 3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (Core, 3 Credits)
GEC 2xx Approved GEC (2 Credits)
One Approved 3 Credit Electives
Notes a Students will be encouraged to select two three
credit Electives with priority given to the following:
MGT100 Introduction to Management;
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology;
ENS211
The Earth Environmental System;
ENS242
Introduction to Spatial Analysis,
MAT391 Engineering Mathematics II.
Semester 6
CHE221
Atomic Structure, Bonding and Main
Group Chemistry (Core, 2 Credits)
CHE223 Inorganic Chemistry Lab I (Core, 1)
CCB322 Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulics (Core, 3
Credits)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (Core, 3)
MIN329 Rock Breakage and Explosives Engineering
(Core, 3)
MIN325 Mine Supervision and Management Core,3)
Level 400 Mineral Engineering shall consist of the
following courses:
Semester 7
MIP 410 Physical Mineral Processes (Core, Prerequisite MIN 313, 3)
MIP412
Flotation (Core, Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3)
CCB315
Environmental Engineering
MMB314 Measurement and instrumentation MIP413
Extractive Metallurgy (Core, Pre-requisite
MIN 313, 3)
MGT202 Small Business Management (Core, 3)
Semester 8
MIP421
Coal Preparation
(Core, Pre-requisite MIN313, 3)
MIP422
Processing of Precious Metals
(Core, Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3)
MIP423
Diamond Processing Technology
(Core, Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3)
MIP424
Mining Industry Economics (Core, 3) MIP425
Mine Management (Core, Pre-requisite
MIN 313, 3)
MIP410
Physical mineral processes
Level 500 Mineral Engineering shall consist of the
following courses:
Semester 9
MIP511
Mineral Separation Processes (Core, Prerequisite MIN 313, 3 Credits) MIP512 Plant
Process and Flow Sheet Design (Core, Pre-r
equisite MIN 313, 3 Credits)
MIP513
Process Control and Instrumentation
(Option, Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3 Credits)
MIP514
Project I (Core, Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3
Credits)
IMB513
Industrial Relations (Elective)

Semester 10
MIP521
Processing Plant Equipment Selection and
Maintenance (Core, Pre-requisiteMIN 313, 3
Credits)
MIP522
Materials Handling and Transport (Core,Prerequisite MIN 313, 3 Credits)
MIP523
Tailings and Wastewater Disposal (Core,
Pre-requisite MIN 313, 3 Credits)
MIP524
Project II (Core, 3 Credits)
Electives
CBB529

Engineering Ethics and Professional
Conduct (3)
IMB525
Production and operations management
Totals 15
A course may consist entirely of fieldwork, project work,
practical work, design, and seminars. In addition to work
during the semester, a subject may include prescribed
fieldwork or assignments during the vacation periods.
Assessment
Continuous assessment in courses shall be based on
tests and/or design, assignments, and where applicable
laboratory reports and field reports.
The ratio of continuous assessment to formal
examination shall be 2:3
Overall performance in a course shall be as specified in
the General Regulation 00.84.
Final Examinations
There shall be no supplementary examinations. A
student who fails a core or pre-requisite or corequisite course shall retake the course when offered
again. A student who has failed an optional/elective/
general education course may retake the course or its
equivalent.

29.922 A student shall undergo a 2 week Mine Tour
after level 300 (MIP 320).
During the Professional Training students shall be
subjected to such codes, procedures, laws, rules, and
other regulations as applicable to the mining industry/
organisation.
Assessment
During each Professional Training period, students
shall be visited 2 times at location of placement to be
assessed by staff teaching on the programme.
A student’s performance will be assessed by means
of: Confidential report from the student’s immediate
supervisor at location of placement.
Professional Training reports and logbook submitted by
the student at the end of each Internship period.
Professional Training visits by an assessor from the
relevant Department of Faculty of Engineering and
Technology.
The Professional Training session shall be evaluated as
specified in 2.2. The ratio of Confidential Report marks
to Professional Report marks to Professional Training
Visits shall be based on the FET industrial training
regulations.
Assessment of the Tour of Mine Treatment Plants shall
be by submission of a written report.
A student who has an incomplete grade shall be
allowed to complete Professional Training at a time
recommended by the Faculty.
Repeating Professional Training
A student who fails to meet the requirements of
Professional Training shall be required to repeat the
training at a time recommended by the Faculty.

Applicants in possession of an appropriate “A” level
qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics
and Physics maybe exempted from taking Mathematics
and Physics from the Faculty of Science and may
be admitted into Level 200 but will take Level 100
Geomatics courses.
A student admitted directly to Level 200 Geomatics who
has not completed Level 100 Geomatics courses must
take them during their first year at the University of
Botswana.
Programme Structure
The programme for the degree in Geomatics will be
a single major programme that will extend over 8
semesters of Full time studies. It shall consist of a single
subject called Geomatics consisting of the courses
shown below:
Degree Structure
Level 100 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester One
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics 1(4 credits, core)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4
credits, code)
CGB111
Geomatics I (4 credits, core)
In addition students will take the following GEC Courses
COM131
ICT121

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2)

Semester Two
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics 11
(4 credits, core, pre-req. MAT111)
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
Modern Physics (4 credits, code)
CGB121 Geomatics II (4 credits, core,pre-req.CGB111)

Progression from Semester to Semester
General Regulation 00.90 shall apply.

Special Regulations for Bachelor’s Degree in Geomatics
(BGEOM)

Award of the Degree
General Regulation 00.85 shall apply.
Classification of the degree shall be in accordance with
the provisions of General Regulation 20.4

Preamble:
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations
000 and 200, the following Faculty Special Regulations
for the Bachelor of Geomatics Degree shall apply.

Professional Training
Students shall undergo Professional Training
(Internship) of 8 weeks duration after levels 200 and
take a 2 weeks Tour of Mine Treatment Plants after
level 300 as specified in the Special Regulations for the
Professional Training and Tour of Mine Treatment Plants
for the Bachelor of Engineering (Mineral Processing)
Programme.

Entrance Requirements
Admission into the Bachelor of Geomatics Degree
Programme shall be as stipulated in the

Students will also take the following winter course:
CGB122 Survey Camp I (2 credits, core, pre-req.
CGB111, CGB121, 2 weeks)

General Regulations
Admission into Level 100 of the BGEOM Degree
Programme shall be a minimum requirement of BGCSE
with a D grade in English and a C grade in Mathematics
and Physics and any one of Chemistry or Biology or a
minimum of Grade B in Science Double Award.

Level 200 shall consist of the following courses:

Assessment of Professional Training
Professional Training shall be assessed as specified in
the Special Regulations for the Professional Training
and Tour of Mine Treatment Plants for the Bachelor of
Engineering (Mineral) Programme.
Special Regulations for Professional Training and
Tour of Mine Treatment Plants for the Bachelor of
Engineering(Mineral Processing) Programme.
Preamble
Subject to the provisions of General Regulations 000
and 100 the following Professional Training Regulations
shall apply to students on the Bachelor of Engineering
(Mineral Engineering) programme.

Admission into Level 200 of the Bachelor of Geomatics
Degree Programme shall be as stipulated in the General
Admission Regulations.
Applicants who are in possession of an appropriate
Diploma in Geomatics, Land Surveying, Cartography,
GIS, or equivalent and have GPA of at least 2.5 or its
equivalent may be admitted directly into Level 200 of
the Degree Programme.
Admission into Level 200 of the BGeom Degree
Programme shall be upon satisfactory completion of
Level 100 of the Bachelor of Science General Degree
of the Faculty of Science with at least C grades in
Mathematics and Physics.

Structure
A student shall undergo supervised Professional Training
of 8 weeks duration after level 200 (MIP 220).

85

In addition students will take the following GEC Courses
COM132 Academic and Professional
Communication (FET) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals

Semester 3
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics I (3credits, core)
CSI141
Programming Principles (3 credits, core)
CGB213 Principles of Cartography (3 credits, core)
CGB211
Elements of Photogrammetry (3 credits,
core)
URP110
Introduction to Planning and the Built
Environment (3 credits, core)
Semester 4
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics II (3, core, pre-req.
MAT291)
CGB221
ENS243
CGB223
GB224

Digital Photogrammetry (3, core, pre-req
CGB211)
Introduction to Remote Sensing (3, core)
Digital Cartography (3, core, pre-req.
CGB213)
Programming for Geomatics (3 credits, core,
pre-req. CSI141)

CGB424
The students will also take the following winter course:
ITB200
Industrial Training (4 credits, core, 8 weeks)
Level 300 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 5
MAT391 Engineering Mathematics III (3, core)
CGB311
Engineering Surveying (3, core, pre-req.
CGB121)
CGB312
LAW354
CGB313

Geodesy I (3, core, pre-req MAT292)
Land Law for Geomatics (3, core)
Survey Adjustment and Analysis (4, core,
pre-req MAT292)

Semester 6
CGB321 Introduction to Land Administration (3,
core; pre-req CGB111)
CGB322 Principles of GIS (3, core)
CGB323 Satellite Positioning Systems (3 credits, core,
pre-req. CGB312)
CGB324 Geodesy II (3, core, pre-req. CGB312)
CSI262
Database Concepts (3, core)
In addition students will take the following winter
courses:
ITB300
CGB325

Industrial Training II (4 credits, core, 8
weeks)
Survey Camp II (2 credits, core, 		
pre-req. CGB311, CGB313, 2 weeks)

Level 400 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 7
CGB411
Research Project I (3) (3, core, pre-req
ITB300)
CGB412 Spatial Data Modelling and Analysis (3, core,
pre-req. CGB322)
CGB413 Advanced Land Administration 3, core, prereq. CGB321)
In addition the students will choose 2 options from the
following:
CGB414 Remote Sensing Applications
option, pre-req. ENS243)
CGB415 Advanced Cartographic Visualisation (3,
option, pre-req. CGB223)
CGB416 GIS Design and Implementation (3 credits,
option, pre-req. CSI262 & CGB322)
CGB417 Digital Image Processing (3, option, pre-req.
CGB221& ENS243)
CGB418 Principles and Practice of SDI Development
(3, option,CGB322 pre-req.)
Semester 8
CBB529 Engineering Ethics and Professional
Conduct (3) or IMB523 Professional
Ethics and Practice (3, core)
CGB421 Research Project II (3, core, pre-req CGB411)
CGB422 Cadastral Surveying Practice (4 credits, core
pre-req CGB311)
CGB426 Geomatics for Mining (3 core, pre-req.
CGB311)

In addition students will choose any 1 option from the
following:
CGB425 Location-based Services (3, option, pre-req
CGB322)
CGB423 GIS Applications (4, option, pre-req.CGB322)

Special Studies in Land administration (3
option, pre-re CGB321)

A course may consist entirely of fieldwork, project work,
practical work, design, and seminars. In addition to work
during the semester, a subject may include prescribed
fieldwork or assignments during the vacation periods.
Assessment
Continuous assessment in courses shall be based on
tests and assignments, and where applicable laboratory
reports and field reports. The ratio between tests and
assignment shall be 1:1.
The ratio of continuous assessment to formal
examination shall be 2:3.
A project shall be evaluated by continuous assessment,
oral presentation and/or demonstration and a
written report. The ratio of the marks for continuous
assessment, presentation assessment and written report
shall be 1:2:5.
Progression from Semester to Semester General
Regulation 00.90 shall apply.
Award of the Degree
General Regulation 00.85, shall apply. (A minimum of
139 credits).
Classification of the degree shall be in accordance with
the provisions of General Regulation 20.4.
COURSE LISTING FOR BENG (CIVIL)
CCB231 Material science For Engineers (3)
The course consists of six parts: Types of Materials;
Materials Science (Atomic Structure, Arrangement &
Movement); Properties of Materials; Controlling of the
Microstructure & Mechanical Properties of Materials
(Principles of Solidification Strengthening & Processing,
Phase Diagrams); Engineering Materials (Ferrous Alloys,
Nonferrous Alloys, Ceramic Materials, Polymers &
Composite Materials); Failure in Materials in Stress.
CCB232 Engineering Mechanics: Statics (3)
The course introduces students to the fundamental
concepts of mechanics and develops their analytical
and problem-solving abilities.
CCB241 Mechanics of Materials (3)
The course introduces students to the fundamental
concepts of stress, strain, elastic and plastic behaviour
of solid bodies subjected to various types of loading.
CCB313 Surveying (3)
The course introduces the students to the principles of
surveying and how surveying information can be used
in solving civil engineering problems.
CCB331 Analysis of Structures (3)
Structural engineering course that introduces
fundamental structural engineering concepts with
emphasis on analysis of statically determinate and
indeterminate structures.
CCB332 Materials in Construction (3)
The course consists of five parts: Part I: Metals; Part II:
Wood; Part III: Concrete; Part IV: Bituminous Materials;
Part V: Bricks & Blocks.
CCB333 Fluid Mechanics for Civil Engineers (3)
The course introduces fundamental principles of
continuity, energy and momentumas applied to fluid
statics, fluid dynamics, pipe flows, similarity laws, fluid

86

loading and unsteady flows.
CCB334 Geology for Civil Engineers (3)
The course provides an overview of Planet earth,
minerals, the rock cycle, structural geology, surface
processes, soils, ground water systems, natural geology,
and environmental geology.
CCB341 Reinforced Concrete Design (3)
The course aims to familiarize students with the
principles of limit state design and requirements of EC
2 or equivalent codes, in order that the students are
equipped with the skills to be able to design the basic
elements of reinforced concrete structures for bending,
shear, deflection and cracking.
CCB342 Soil Mechanics (3)
The course provides a transition from engineering
geology to geotechnical engineering. It covers
soils formation soil profiling and description, index
properties, and soil classification. Having introduced
the basic geological concepts, the course switches to
basic soil mechanics covering phase-relationships,
compaction and stress in a soil mass.
CCB343 Hydraulics (3)
The course presents fundamental knowledge on the
theory of Fluid Mechanics with emphasis on Hydraulics
and helps in acquiring skills to apply this knowledge for
the solution of practical water engineering problems in
the field of fluid statics/dynamics, pipe flow and open
channel flow.
CCB431 Structural Steel Design (3)
The course covers the basic principles of limit state
design in structural steel as embodied in EC 3and /
or equivalent codes.. It introduces steel structural
elements and structural design, material properties of
structural steels, limit state design principles, the design
of compression members including beam-columns,
the design of tension members, structural steel beams
and connections in bolting and welding. An important
feature of the course is that it encompasses both
behaviour and practical design
CCB432 Geotechnical Engineering 1 (3)
The course covers the engineering properties of
soils, ground investigation, and design of shallow
foundations .The soil properties studied include;
seepage, consolidation, and shear strength.
CCB433 Engineering hydrology (3)
The course introduces students to the key concepts and
methods in physical and engineering hydrology. The
content included in this course is critical for developing
the knowledge, comprehension and application
of hydrologic principles which will be analysed,
synthesized and applied in later courses.
CCB435 Highway Engineering (3)
The course provides an overview of transportation
subsystems; Geometric design principles for highway
design; Road safety; Earthwork and construction
equipment; Drainage; Highway construction materials;
Highway construction ; Highway maintenance; Use of
computer software.
CCB441 Principles of Civil Engineering Construction (3)
The course presents the fundamental processes involved
in the assembly of civil engineering infrastructural
facilities. Emphases are placed on planning, design and
assembly of facilities. In addition, the course comprise
of a field trip segment so that the practical aspects of
the course can be gleaned in the field

CCB442 Geotechnical Engineering 11 (3)
The course covers the design of more complex
structures such as pile foundations, earth retaining
structures, and slopes.
CCB443 Water Supply Engineering (3)
The course introduces students to general features of
water supply systems, water distribution systems, water
treatment principles and design.
CCB444 Traffic Engineering (3)
The course provides an overview of Traffic flow theory,
Intersection design and control, Concepts of Level of
Service, Transportation surveys, Traffic management,
Design of parking facilities, Public transport concepts,
and Transportation facilities impacts
CCB445 Waste Water Engineering and Management (3)
The course provides basic knowledge and skills
necessary for the design, construction and operation of
water and wastewater treatment facilities
CCB531 Research Project (6)
The Research Project (CCB531) is one of two “capstone”
courses at the culmination of the BEng Programme.
The course requires students to undertake a significant
engineering study under limited supervision, involving
aspects such as background research, planning,
implementation, testing, critical analysis and the
communication of the findings and results of the study.
CCB535 Environmental Management (3)
The course provides awareness on the global climate
change and environmental protection; helps develop
skills on environmental management, environmental
impact assessment, waste management and
appreciation of health aspects of water supply and
sanitation.
CCB533 Transportation Engineering (3)
The course provides an overview of non-motorized
transport, i.e. pedestrian and bicycle facilities design;
the basic principles of railway design; airport planning
and design of runways, and basic principles of
conveyor desing; it further provides the learner with
transportation planning know-how based upon a
projection of land use, development of transportation
planning models to predict future number of trips and
their spatial distribution
CCB534 Pre-stressed Concrete Design (3)
The course provides an introduction to the basic
principles of pre-stressing, the design of pre-stressed
concrete simply supported beams for serviceability
and ultimate limit states in flexure, losses of pre-stress,
deflection and shear considerations. It also introduces
wood as a structural material, the principles of timber
design, design of timber beams and columns, and
timber trusses.
CCB536 Foundations on Difficult Soils (3)
The course provides an introduction to problem soils
found in the southern African geological region.
In-depth characterisation of problem soils affecting
foundation design and construction (i.e., collapsible and
expansive soils) is carried out leading to the design of
appropriate foundation system for the conditions.
CCB541 Design Project (6)
This course attempts to tie together various aspects
of the Civil Engineering programme that had been
presented in all courses from the first to final year
by engaging the students in a design project that

academics in the department. The brief on the
project, including terms of reference, is provided by
the academic supervisor. It essentially serves as a
precursor of what students can expect to encounter
after graduation. Projects cover structures, water,
construction materials, geotechnics, highway
engineering, transportation engineering, and
environmental engineering.

and satellite photogrammetry.
CGB223 Digital Cartography (3)
This course deals with digital coordinates, digital
representation of cartographic data, map digitisation,
semi-automatic map generalisation, coordinate systems
and datums, coordinate transformations, digital
terrain models, geographic data acquisition methods,
computer-aided statistical and thematic mapping.

CCB542 Measurement and Specifications for Civil
Engineers
The course exposes students to techniques used in
the measurement of civil engineering works and
preparation of a typical bill of quantities for the same

CGB224 Programming for Geomatics (3)
The course aims at introducing the student to objectoriented programming, activeX, networks & World
Wide Web, spatial data structures, geographic software
components: Open GIS specifications, MapObjects and
ArcObjects.

CCB543 Masonry and Timber Design (3)
Then course introduces students to fundamental
concepts of masonry and timber as structural materials
and exposes them to the design of structural elements
an either material, based on Eurocodes
CCB544 Dam Design (3)
The course advances the skill of the students in respect
of design of dams, reservoirs and energy dissipation
devices across rivers using hydraulics, hydrologic,
foundation engineering and structural engineering
theories and principles.
BACHELOR OF GEOMATICS COURSES
CGB111 Geomatics I (4)
Introduction to Geomatics and review of the necessary
mathematics; measurements of land: plane surveying;
geodesy: the scientific foundation; measurements from
space: satellite positioning and navigation. Mapping
and managing geographic information.
CGB122 Survey Camp I (2)
The survey camp covers fundamental principles of
field methods; errors and field checks; optical distance
measurement; trig heighting; taping; adjusting angles;
levelling; traverses; horizontal circular curves; vertical
curves; measuring longitudinal and cross-sections,
and report writing. Emphasis is placed on practical
experience. Students will be divided into groups of four
or five persons.
CGB121 Geomatics II (4)
Introduction to survey standards and specifications;
survey network design and adjustment; operational
and quality control aspects of electronic distance
measurement (EDM), angle measurement, trig
heighting and precise levelling; introduction to
satellite positioning, observation techniques and data
processing; advanced positioning techniques including
automated field surveying, laser levels and reflectorless
total stations to capture topographic data; data
processing and analysis; setting out.
CGB211 Elements of Photogrammetry (3)
The course aims at introducing the student
to the geometry of aerial photographs, stereo
photogrammetry, mapping with analogue
photogrammetric instruments, analytical and digital
photogrammetry.
CGB213 Principles of Cartography (3)
The course aims at introducing the student to the basic
concepts of cartography such as reference surfaces,
coordinate systems and map projections, map design
and layout, topographic and thematic cartography.
CGB221 Digital Photogrammetry (3)
This course deals with concepts and applications of
analytical photogrammetry, digital photogrammetry

87

ITB200 Industrial Training (4)
During the course of industrial training, students shall
undergo 8 weeks of supervised industrial training.
Students shall be subjected to such codes, procedures,
laws, rules and regulations as applicable to the industry.
CGB311 Engineering Surveying (3)
The course aims at introducing the student to
methods of data collection in engineering projects.
It covers curves, route surveys, and earthworks,
DTMs in engineering surveys, construction surveying,
deformation surveys and application of terrestrial
scanners.
CGB312 Geodesy I (3)
This course covers an introduction to geodesy,
Coordinate transformations, Geodetic Astronomy,
Geodetic computations and the geodetic control
network in Botswana.
CGB313 Survey Adjustment and Analysis (4)
Review of errors in measurements, measurements and
their analysis, weights in measurements, random error
theory; random error propagation; propagation of
random errors in traverses, principles of least square
adjustments and application in Geomatics; adjustments
of level nets, statistical assessment of adjustment
results, goodness of fit test.
LAW354 Land Law for Geomatics (3)
The course aims at presenting the various laws that
impact on land administration. It covers concepts
of Property law, Landownership, Rights in land,
Conveyancing and introducing the Various Acts on land
in Botswana
CGB321 Introduction to Land Administration (3)
The course introduces the concepts of land; spatial
organization; evolution of land tenure systems and
concept of property; the cadastre concept and land
information systems; land tenure systems in Botswana;
land registration systems; cadastral surveying systems:
boundary delimitation processes; survey systems;
writing legal descriptions; retracement surveys;
subdivision surveys; boundary evidence and possessory
rights; land reform: land redistribution, land tenure
reform, and land restitution in southern Africa.
CGB322 Principles of GIS (3)
The course aims to familiarize the students with the
basic concepts of GIS. It covers the basic Concepts, Data
Sources, Data Capture Methods, Data Structure and
models, Hardware and software Configuration, Spatial
relationships, GIS Analysis Functions, GIS and Remote
Sensing, and a review of GIS software.
CGB323 Satellite Positioning Systems (3)
The objective of the course is to teach the basic
principles of GPS, GLONASS and Galileo as means of

position using satellite methods. It introduces the
historical development of the three systems, the Signal
Structure, GPS positioning concepts of resection from
space, Point positioning, Relative positioning, Static
positioning, Kinematic positioning RTK. Surveying and
other mapping applications are also introduced.
CGB324 Geodesy II (3)
This course deals with the theoretical concepts of
Satellite Geodesy and their use in positioning. It
introduces students to concepts of Physical Geodesy
leading to geopotential models, Orthometric and
Geodetic Heights
CGB325 Survey Camp II (2)
This is a field course covering planning and logistics of
survey operations, horizontal control network, cadastral
survey design; DTM modelling, precise engineering
surveys, use of UAVs for aerial surveys, GPS surveys;
production of final plan(s) using Geomatics software
and report writing.
ITB300 Industrial Training (4)
After level 300, students shall further undergo 8 weeks
of supervised industrial training. Students shall also be
subjected to such codes, procedures, laws, rules and
regulations as applicable to the industry.
CGB411 Research Project I (3)
Project definition, selection of research topic, Preparing
a research proposal; statement of the problem; goals
and objectives of the research; literature review,
research methodology, schedule and budget for the
research project.
CGB412 Spatial Data Modelling & Analysis
This course introduces students to the modern
computer-based approaches employed to represent
and manage spatial data and information for survey
and geographic information systems applications. The
course concentrates on spatial data structures, data
standards, and spatial data modelling: 2D data models,
2.5 data models, 3D data models, 4D data models,
5D data models, building information modelling,
geostatistics and case studies on spatial data modelling.
CGB413 Advanced Land Administration (3)
The course introduces modern issues in land tenure,
land policy, land management and administration;
survey law and practice: a profession for the 21st
century; land information management: principles
and applications. The role of property systems in land
management, natural resource management, and
parcel-based information systems. Comparative analysis
of land tenure, land reform, and land administration
systems.
CGB415 Advanced Cartographic Visualisation (3)
The course aims at introducing cartographic
visualisation techniques. The course content will
include cartographic visualisation processes;
different visualisation strategies in Geospatial Data
infrastructures; exploratory cartography using the
intranet and WWW; Web Map Design and Multimedia
CGB416 GIS Design and Implementation (3)
The course aims at teaching student how to design
and implement a GIS system. The course content
includes analysis of requirement; system planning and
specifications; implementation of system; Legal and
Policy issues.

CGB417 – Digital Image Processing (3)
The course is designed to introduce digital image
processing concepts with specific reference to
Remote Sensing data. It covers the basic concepts of
Digital Image, Source of data, Data formats; Image
Pre-processing; Image Enhancement; Information
Extraction; Image Processing System Considerations.
CGB418 Principles and Practice of SDI Development (3)
This course introduces the principles and practice of
implementing national spatial data infrastructures,
challenges and opportunities for developing NSDI.
CGB421 Research Project II (3)
This is a continuation of the course CGB411.
Data collection and analysis techniques, presentation
design and delivery, report writing
CGB 422 Cadastral Surveying Practice (4)
The course aims at preparing the students to
have sound knowledge of the legal and technical
requirements for making a cadastral survey. The course
content includes cadastral surveying; methods of
performing cadastral surveys; role of a land surveyor in
resolving boundary disputes and as an expert witness;
cadastral surveying computations; cadastral layout
design and implementation; Land Survey Act and
regulations; Sectional Titles Act and regulations; Tribal
Land Act and regulations; Town and Country Planning
Act and regulations; Deeds Registry Act and regulations;
Survey of mining leases.
CGB423 GIS Applications (4)
The course aims at familiarizing the students with
various real life applications of GIS. The content
includes guided study topics in the following fields
Topographic Mapping, Environment, Forestry; Biology;
Geology; Mining; Utilities, AM/FM Systems, LIS; GIS in
developing countries. Other relevant application areas
can be discussed here and will depend on student
interest.
CGB424 Special Studies in Land Administration (3)
The course introduces the concepts of land
management and land administration from economic
and institutional perspectives; evolving concepts
of property and land tenure systems; Design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of land
reforms; Post-settlement support interventions.
CGB414 Remote Sensing Applications (3)
The course aims at familiarizing the students with
various mapping applications of remote sensing. The
course content will include guided study of various
applications of remote sensing such as earth science,
agriculture and land use and water resources.
CGB425 Location Based Services (3)
The objective of the course is to present the use of
mobile technology to the students as possible utility in
both field and office automation in a survey practice.
The course synopsis covers Introduction to LBS,
Databases, Linear referencing, and Data transmission.
CGB426 Mining Surveying for Geomatics
The course aims at introducing different mine surveying
methods ranging from establishment of horizontal and
vertical control in open pit and underground mines. It
covers stoke surveys, volumetric analysis of stockpiles,
deformation monitoring and rock subsidence, rock
measurements using LIDAR, application of virtual reality
and augmented reality in mining.

88

CBB 529 Engineering Ethics and Professional
Conduct (3)
Professional Ethics is a general course for engineering
students, covering issues of professional ethics for
engineers and their practice. Emphasis is on the study of
ethical theories in the application to engineering issues
and on engineering professional practice. At the end
of this course a student should be able to distinguish
between ethical and immoral practices and practice
responsibly along ethical and moral principles.

Bachelor of Engineering (Mining) Courses
MIN 200 – Mine Tour I
A one-week study tour of selected mines, metallurgical
plants and mining-related suppliers in Botswana
MIN211 Introduction to Mining Engineering (3)
Historical perspectives of mining.Social, economic and
environmental impacts of mining.The mining cycle.
The production cycle.The extraction process. Ancillary
services
MIN221 Introduction to Mine Safety & Health (3)
Instruction in the safety aspects of mining accordance
with the MSHA Training Program required for all new
miners. Subjects include self-rescue and respiratory
protection, ground control, hazard recognition, mine
gases, and legal aspects associated with mining.
MIN313 Introduction to Mineral Processing (3)
An understanding of common ore-processing
techniques and process routes in modern usage
provides insights for the efficient production, handling
and processing of minerals. The explanation of
underlying theory is used to emphasise the appropriate
use and limitations of available technologies.
MIN326 Surveying for Mineral Engineers (3)
Review of plane surveying methods, operational
surveying, control point networks, underground
traversing, transfer of meridian underground,
preparation of maps and sections, positional and
directional guidance of operations, measuring the
progress of work, measuring rock mass movement,
exploratory surveying.
MIN329 Rock Breakage and Explosives Engineering (3)
Rock breakage methods, Machine Mining, Drilling,
Explosives, Blasting, Blast design, Special blasting
Applications, Safety, environmental and regulatory
aspects of Blasting
MIN325 Mine Supervision and Management (3)
Principles of effective communication in the workplace,
human resource management, principles of supervision
and management, project management skills, industrial
relations, economics and mining decision-making,
economics and mining decision making.
MIN 411: Rock Drilling (3)
Principles of mechanical rock disintegration, Drilling
parameters, Drilling equipment, Advances in drilling
technology, hole deviation, selection of drill equipment.
MIN 412: Rock Mechanics (3)
Basic rock mechanics theory, engineering properties
of soils, Rocks and rock masses, Pit slope design,
Underground opening design, Support of excavations.

Bachelor of Engineering (Mineral) Courses
MIN 413 – Surface Mining – Hard Rock (3)
Pit design information, Ore reserve estimation, Mineral
block evaluation criteria, Determination of ultimate
pit limits, Material properties and volume calculations,
Production planning, Drilling and blasting, Materials
handling, Dewatering and drainage systems, Common
surface mining methods.
MIN 414 – Underground Mining – Hard Rock (3)
Characterization of mineable ore deposits, Basic mine
planning, Common underground mining methods,
General cost and manning requirements.
MIN 422: Rock Blasting (3)
Explosives, Initiators, Factors affecting Blasting Results,
Blast design, Special blasting Applications, Safety,
environmental and regulatory aspects of Blasting.
MIN423 – Coal Mining (3)
Surface coal mining, Underground coal mining, General
cost and manning requirements.
MIN 400 – Mine Tour II
A two-week study tour of selected mines, metallurgical
plants and mining-related suppliers in Southern Africa.
MIN 510 Project I (3)
Project definition, Data collection and analysis
techniques, Presentation design and delivery, Report
design.
MIN 511 – Specialised Blasting Applications (3)
Advances in explosives technology; Properties of
explosives, Types of explosives for underground and
surface operations; Manufacture, transport, storage
and handling of explosives, Advanced blast design
for surface and underground operations, Explosives
for fiery, gaseous mines and other special situations;
Statutory requirements.
MIN 513 – Surface Mine Planning and Design (3)
Mine planning structure, Core business, Role of mine
planning, Essential computations, Mine closure planning
Surface mine planning software.
MIN 516: Mining Geostatistics (3)
Variate descriptions (uni-and bivariate); kriging
(ordinary, block and co- kriging); Estimating a
distribution; Assessing uncertainty.
MIN 521 – Material Handling in Mines (3)
Loading equipment, Transport and hoisting systems,
Construction of wire rope, Mine drainage and
dewatering pumps, Hard-rock tunnelling machines and
raise borer, Auxiliary equipment, Compressed air.
MIN 522 – Mine Power and Drainage (3)
Sources of power, Types of power supplies, Power
control and management, Mine water management,
Pumping and disposal, Environment consideration
MIN 523 – Underground Mine Planning and Design (3)
Mine planning structure, Core business, Role of mine
planning , Essential computations, Mine closure
planning, Underground mine planning software

MIP321: Physical Mineral Processes (3)
Size reduction, ratio, specific energy calculation for
size reduction. Crushing, classification of crushers, jaw
crushers, roll crushers. Roll crushers, impact crushers,
design of crushing flowsheet. Grinding, wet-dry, openclosed mill circuits, classification of mills, road, ball and
pebble mills. Screening, definitions, sieve band analysis
and calculations, Classification and Classifiers.
MIP412: Flotation (3)
Introduction to froth flotation, Principles of Flotation,
Collectors, Frothers, Regulators, Basic flotation circuits,
Flowsheet design, Flotation Machines, Flotation
Plant Practice, Reagents and conditioning, Control of
Flotation Plants, Typical Flotation Separations
MIP413: Extractive Metallurgy (3)
Introduction to metals, The economics of metal
production, Introduction to Pyrometallurgical
extraction, Introduction to Hydrometallurgical
extraction, Industrial application of these methods to
the extraction of metals, Environmental Issues
MIP421: Coal Preparation (3)
The importance of coal in the energy production,
Determination and classification of coals, chemical
properties, Physical properties of coal and coal
petrography, Botswana coals, sampling of coal, Coal
preparation and washability, Washability analyses
and Mayer Curves, Crushing, screening and coal
beneficiation in course particles, Coal beneficiation in
fine particles, Dewatering of coals, Transporting, Storage
of coals, Coal processing plant design and control, Coal
technology-coking of coal, Briquetting, pyrolysis and
gasification of coal
MIP422: Processing of Precious Metals (3)
This course will cover process alternatives and
mineralogical considerations; physical and chemical
recovery technologies; environmental protection; flow
sheet studies for the treatment of gold ores.
MIP423: Diamond Processing Technology (3)
This course will cover the mineralogy of diamond ores;
the comminution process for diamonds; application of
hindered settling in the classification of diamond ores;
the selection of comminution flow sheets (conventional
vsAutogenous milling or semi Autogenous milling
circuits); physical properties of diamonds that are
taken advantage of in the concentration (dense media
separation) and recovery (grease table or lately x-ray
sorting) of diamonds; environmental protection, and
flow sheet studies for the treatment of diamond ores.
MIP424: Mining industry Economics (3)
Mineral industry economics focusing on understanding
the relationship between supply and demand of
mineral commodities; types of markets; the role of
price and technology on mineral commodity supply
and demand; the role of inventories on supply and
production, the relationship between exchange rates
and prices, evaluating mineral investment projects using
discounted cash flow analysis and the role of mineral
policy on the supply of mineral commodities.
MIP425: Mine Management (3)
Management theory, Human resource management,
financial accounting and management, Legal aspects
of business.

89

MIP511: Mineral Separation Processes (3)
Types and characterization of mineral separation
processes; Design objectives and the testing, sizing and
selection of equipment for solid-solid separation, solidliquid separation, concentration process design layout
and economic consideration.
MIP 512 Plant Process and Flow Sheet Design (3)
The application of information obtained from
sampling, bench scale and pilot plant testwork in the
design of mineral processing flow sheets; specifically
comminution circuits, flotation circuits;thckening and
clarification circuits; filtration circuits, and preliminary
estimation of capital cost for major plant equipment as
well as process operating costs and risk analysis.

MIP 513 Process Control and Instrumentation for
Mineral Engineers (3)
This course will cover Process Control, Control Systems,
Control of Hardware Instrumentation; Control System
Maintenance as well instrumentation and Control of
Crushing and Grinding Circuits, Solid-Solid Separation
Processes, Thickeners and other solid-liquid Separation
Circuits and pressure oxidation
MIP514: Project I (3)
Project definition, Data collection and analysis
techniques, Presentation design and delivery, Report
design.
MIP521 Processing Plant Equipment Selection &
Maintenance (3)
The study of factors which influence the selection
of comminution circuits and the application of this
knowledge in the selection of primary crushers,
grinding mills, and other circuits including plant design
and layout of selected equipment.
MIP 522 Materials Handling and Transport (3)
Slurry Pumps, Slurry lines, Pump boxes and Launders,
Slurry Pipeline Transportation, Conveyors, Stackers and
Reclaimers, Concentrate Drying, Handling and Storage
Equipment, Bins, Hopper Outlets and Feeders
MIP 523 Tailings and Wastewater Disposal (3)
Tailings Disposal, Design of Tailings Dams and
Impoundments, Waste and Process Water, Removal of
Solutions and Slurries for Cyanide, Acid Rock Drainage,
Environmental and Social Considerations
MIP524: Project II
Project definition, Data collection and analysis
techniques, Presentation design and delivery, Report
design.

DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
The Department of Electrical Engineering offers the
following programmes:
•
Bachelor of Engineering (Electrical)
•
Bachelor of Engineering (Electronic)
•
Master of Science (Electrical Engineering)
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING (ELECTRICAL)
Subject to General Regulations 000 and 200 and
the Faculty Special Regulations 210, the following
Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of
Engineering (Electrical) Degree shall apply:

Entrance Requirements
Admission to the BEng (Electrical) shall be as stipulated
in Faculty Special Regulations 21.10. Applicants in
possession of a Diploma in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, or its equivalent, with a minimum of Credit
including a Credit in Mathematics, may be admitted
directly into Level 200. Applicants in possession of ‘A’
level qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics
and Physics may be admitted directly into Level 200.
Applicants in possession of a Higher Diploma in Electrical
and Electronic Engineering, or its equivalent, with a
minimum of Credit including a Credit in Mathematics,
may be admitted directly into Level 300.

Programme Structure
The Bachelor of Engineering (Electrical) Degree
Programme will be a Single Major that will extend
over 10 semesters of full-time study. It shall contain
one subject called Electrical Engineering consisting of
courses shown below.
The curriculum for Levels 100 and 200 shall be as
stipulated in Faculty Special Regulation 21.20.
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
EEB331
Electrical Network Theory (3 credits, prerequisite EEB241)
EEB332
Analogue Electronic Fundamentals (3
credits, pre-requisite EEB241)
EEB333
Electrical Measurements and 		
Instrumentation, (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB241)
EEB334
Computer Programming I (3 credits, prerequisite GEC122)
MAT391 Engineering Mathematics III (3 credits, prerequisite MAT291)
Level 300
Semester 6
Core Courses
EEB341
Digital Electronics (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB332)
EEB342
Electromagnetics for Engineers (3 credits,
pre-requisite MAT391, co-requisite MAT392)
EEB343
Electrical Engineering Design (3 credits, prerequisite EEB241)
EEB344
Basic Electrical Machines (3 credits, prerequisite EEB241)
MAT392 Engineering Mathematics IV (3 credits, prerequisite MAT391)
Level 300
Winter Session 1
Core Course
ITB340
Industrial Attachment I (4 credits, 8 weeks)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
EEB431
Control Systems I (3 credits, pre-requisite
MAT392)
EEB434
Communications Principles (3 credits, prerequisite MAT392)
EEB451
Power Electronics and Drives (3 credits, prerequisite EEB344)
EEB453
Power Generation and Control (3 credits,
pre-requisite EEB344)
EEB454
Power Transmission and Distribution
Networks (3 credits, pre-requisites MAT392,
EEB331)

Elective Courses:
At least one from
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3 credits)
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3
credits)
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts (3
credits)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3 credits)
Level 400
Semester 8
Core Courses
EEB462
Electrical Machines Drives Design (3 credits,
pre-requisite EEB343, EEB451)
EEB463
Electrical Engineering Laboratory (3 credits,
pre-requisite EEB453, EEB454)
EEB464
Power Transmission and Distribution
Networks Design (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB343, EEB453, EEB454)
EEB465
Power System Analysis (3 credits, prerequisites EEB453, EEB454)
LAW253 Foundations of Engineering Law (3 credits)
MMB444 Engineering Economics (3 credits)
Level 400
Winter Session 2
Core Courses
ITB440
Industrial Training II (4 credits, 8 weeks, prerequisite ITB340)
Level 500
Semester 9
Core Courses
EEB550
Electrical Design Project I (3 credits, prerequisites EEB343, EEB462, EEB463, EEB464,
EEB465)
EEB555
Self Study Topic (3 credits)
CCB535 Environmental Management (3 credits)
MMB533 Engineering and Project Management (3
credits)
Optional Courses:
At least one from
EEB551
Power System Economics (3 credits, prerequisite EEB464, EEB465)
EEB552
Switchgear and Protection (3 credits, prerequisite EEB464, EEB465)
EEB553
Power System Simulation (3 credits, prerequisite EEB464, EEB465)
EEB554
Electrical Machines (3 credits, pre-requisite,
EEB462)
Level 500
Semester 10
Core Courses
EEB560
Electrical Design Project II (9 credits, prerequisites EEB550)
IMB523
Professional Ethics and Practice (3 credits)
Optional Courses:
At least one from
EEB561
Power System Operation (3 credits, prerequisite EEB551)
EEB562
High Voltage Engineering (3 credits, prerequisite EEB552)
EEB563
Power System Planning (3 credits, prerequisite EEB553)
EEB564
Electrical Machines Drives (3 credits, prerequisite EEB554)
Assessment
Except for EEB550
(Electrical Design Project I) and
EEB560 (Electrical Design Project II), EEB463 (Electrical
Engineering Laboratory) and courses with practical work
marks, all courses shall be assessed as specified in Faculty

90

Special Regulations 21.30.
For EEB550, the ratio of marks for continuous assessment
to report to oral presentation shall be 1:2:1.
For EEB560, the ratio of marks for continuous assessment
to final report to presentation (oral and poster) shall be
1:3:1.
EEB463 shall be assessed based on 100 percent
continuous assessment only.
For courses with practical work marks, for continuous
assessment, the ratio of marks for tests to practical work
to assignments shall be 4:3:1.
The following exit level outcome (ELO) courses: EEB454
(ELO 2), EEB464 (ELO 8), EEB463 (ELO 4), EEB465 (ELO
5), EEB560 (ELO 1, 3, 6), EEB555 (ELO 9), CCB535 (ELO
7), IMB523 (ELO 10) and MMB533 (ELO 11) shall be
subjected to external examination.
Each student shall be required to keep and submit
a course folder(s) comprising all assessed work
(assignments, quizzes, laboratory/workshop/field reports
and tests etc.) for scrutiny by the external examiner.
The course folder(s) shall be submitted to the respective
course lecturer by the last day of the examination
period. The folders shall be returned to the student after
publication of results.
Passing a course is subject to Special Regulation for the
Bachelor of Engineering Degree 21.40.
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING (ELECTRONIC)
Subject to General Regulations 000 and 200 and
the Faculty Special Regulations 210, the following
Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of
Engineering (Electronic) Degree shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the BEng (Electronic) shall be as stipulated
in Faculty Special Regulations 21.10. Applicants in
possession of a Diploma in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, or its equivalent, with a minimum of Credit
including a Credit in Mathematics, may be admitted
directly into Level 200. Applicants in possession of ‘A’
level qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics
and Physics may be admitted directly into Level 200.
Applicants in possession of a Higher Diploma in Electrical
and Electronic Engineering, or its equivalent, with a
minimum of Credit including a Credit in Mathematics,
may be admitted directly into Level 300.
Programme Structure
The Bachelor of Engineering (Electronic) Degree
Programme will be a Single Major that will extend
over 10 semesters of full-time study. It shall contain
one subject called Electronic Engineering consisting of
courses shown below.
The curriculum for Levels 100 and 200 shall be as
stipulated in Faculty Special Regulation 21.20.
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
EEB331
Electrical Network Theory (3 credits, prerequisite EEB241)
EEB332
Analogue Electronic Fundamentals
(3 credits, pre-requisite EEB241)
EEB333
Electrical Measurements and 		
Instrumentation, (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB241)
EEB334
Computer Programming I (3 credits, prerequisite GEC122)

MAT391

Engineering Mathematics III (3 credits,
pre-requisite MAT291)

Level 300
Semester 6
Core Courses
EEB341
Digital Electronics (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB332)
EEB342
Electromagnetics for Engineers (3 credits,
pre-requisite MAT391, co-requisite MAT392)
EEB343
Electrical Engineering Design (3 credits, prerequisite EEB241)
EEB344
Basic Electrical Machines (3, pre-requisite
EEB241)
MAT392 Engineering Mathematics IV (3, prerequisite MAT391)
Level 300
Winter Session 1
Core Course
ITB340
Industrial Attachment I (4 credits, 8 weeks)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
EEB431
Control Systems I (3 credits, pre-requisite
MAT392)
EEB432
Signals and Systems (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB332)
EEB433
Analogue Electronics Design (3 credits, prerequisite EEB332)
EEB434
Communications Principles (3 credits, prerequisite MAT392)
EEB435
Computer Programming II (3 credits, prerequisite EEB334)
Elective Courses:
At least one from
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3 credits)
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts (3)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3)
Level 400
Semester 8
Core Courses
EEB441
Control Systems II (3 credits, pre-requisite
EEB431)
EEB442
Microprocessor Engineering Applications (3
credits, pre-requisite EEB341)
EEB443
Digital Electronics Design (3 credits, prerequisite EEB341)
EEB444
Electronic Experimental Design Laboratory
(3credits, pre-requisites EEB431, 		
EEB432, EEB433, EEB434)
LAW253 Foundations of Engineering Law (3)
MMB444 Engineering Economics (3 credits)
Level 400
Winter Session 2
Core Courses
ITB440
Industrial Training II (4 credits, 8 weeks, prerequisite ITB340)
Level 500
Semester 9
Core Courses
EEB530
Electronic Design Project I (3 credits, prerequisites EEB343, EEB444)
EEB535
Independent Study Topic (3 credits)
CCB535 Environmental Management (3 credits)
MMB533 Engineering and Project Management (3)

Optional Courses:
At least one from
EEB531
Digital Signal Processing (3 credits, prerequisite MAT392)
EEB532
Computer Architecture and Systems (3
credits, pre-requisite EEB442)
EEB533
Antennas and Wave Propagation (3 credits,
pre-requisite EEB342)
EEB534
Telephony and Digital Communications and
(3 credits, pre-requisite, EEB434)
Level 500
Semester 10
Core Courses
EEB540
Electronic Design Project II (9 credits, prerequisites EEB530)
IMB523
Professional Ethics and Practice (3)
Optional Courses:
At least one from
EEB541
Advanced Digital Signal Processing (3
credits, pre-requisite EEB531)
EEB542
Communication Networks (3 credits, prerequisite EEB434)
EEB543
Electromagnetic Wave Guides (3 credits,
pre-requisite EEB533)
EEB544
Wireless Communications (3 credits, prerequisite EEB534)
Assessment
Except for EEB530 (Electronic Design Project I), EEB540
(Electronic Design Project II), EEB444 (Electronic
Experimental Design Laboratory) and courses with
practical work marks, all courses shall be assessed as
specified in Faculty Special Regulations 21.30.
For EEB530, the ratio of marks for continuous assessment
to report to oral presentation shall be 1:2:1.
For EEB540, the ratio of marks for continuous assessment
to final report to presentation (oral and poster) shall be
1:3:1
EEB444 shall be assessed based on 100 percent
continuous assessment only.
For courses with practical work marks, for continuous
assessment, the ratio of marks for tests to practical work
to assignments shall be 4:3:1.
The following exit level outcome (ELO) courses: EEB441
(ELO 2), EEB443 (ELO 8), EEB444 (ELO 4, 5), EEB540 (ELO
1, 3, 6), EEB535 (ELO 9), CCB535 (ELO 7), IMB523 (ELO
10), and MMB533 (ELO 11) shall be subjected to external
examination.
Each student shall be required to keep and submit
a course folder(s) comprising all assessed work
(assignments, quizzes, laboratory/workshop/field reports
and tests etc.) for scrutiny by the external examiner.
The course folder(s) shall be submitted to the respective
course lecturer by the last day of the examination
period. The folders shall be returned to the student after
publication of results.
Passing a course is subject to Special Regulation for the
Bachelor of Engineering Degree 21.40.
COURSE LISTING
For all other courses not offered by the department,
please consult the relevant department for synopsis.

EEB231 Electrical Fundamentals I
The course provides an introduction to electrical
engineering. It covers the principles of direct current
circuits. The coverage includes network components,
basic direct current concepts, basic network theorems
and introduction to direct current machines.

EEB241 Electrical Fundamentals II
The course in the second of two courses that provide an
introduction to electrical engineering, in particular the
principles of alternating current and amplifier circuits.
The coverage includes network components, basic
alternating current concepts, basic network theorems,
introduction to alternating current machines and
applications of semiconductor devices.

EEB331 Electrical Network Theory
The course introduces students to network topology,
time and frequency domain analysis, three phase
circuits, two-port networks, application of Fourier and
Laplace transforms to networks. The course focuses on
problem solving skills in electrical networks, analysis and
design of electric networks and applying the principles of
electrical network theory in the solution of problems in
other disciplines of electrical engineering.
EEB332 Analogue Electronic Fundamentals
The course introduces students to Diode semiconductor
theory; Diode applications & circuits; Bipolar Junction
Transistor (BJT); Field Effect Transistors (FET); Transistor
Small Signal Amplifiers; Amplifier Frequency Response;
Feedback
EEB333 Electrical Measurements and Instrumentation
The course is an introduction to electrical
measurements and instrumentation with focus on
the measurement methods; potentiometer and bridge
measurements; transducers and signal conditioning.
EEB334 Computer Programming I
The course lays a foundation for programming courses
studies later during the programme and aims to produce
a level of competency in the analysis and representation
of a programming problem through algorithms,
appreciate the need for an object-oriented programming
language and study the basic characteristics of objectoriented Programming.
EEB341 Digital Electronics
This course familiarizes the students with the
fundamentals of digital electronics and prepares them
for design and analysis of digital systems. Topics include
number systems and codes; basic and derived logic
functions; Boolean algebra, minimisation techniques;
combinational and sequential logic devices.
EEB342 Electromagnetics for Engineers
The course provides an introduction to electromagnetic
fields theory with a focus on introductory vector
analysis, electrostatics, magnetostatics and time varying
fields. The course aims to produce a level of competency
in the fundamentals of electromagnetic field theory
by emphasizing both mathematical rigor and physical
conceptual reasoning, as applied to electromagnetic
fields problems.
EEB343 Electrical Engineering Design
The course provides an introduction to electrical
engineering design theory and principles, their

91

applications and the factors that contribute to good and
successful electrical engineering designs. Basic theories,
processes and procedures are presented, and conception
designs are studied.
EEB344 Basic Electrical Machines
The course provides an introduction to electrical
machines with focus on the theory of the magnetic
circuits and principles of operation of single phase
transformers, DC generators/motors and Three-phase
induction motors.
EEB431 Control Systems I
The course is an introduction to linear control systems
and focuses on the theory of systems analogies;
mathematical representation; controllers; time and
frequency domain analysis and system stability. Topics
covered: Open-loop and closed-loop linear control
systems, Transfer functions, First, second and third order
control systems, Stability of control systems, Transient
response, Control system compensation, Linear control
system design, Proportional, Integral and Derivative
controllers.
EEB432 Signals and Systems
This course is intended to develop an in-depth
understanding of continuous-time signals and
systems and briefly considers basic discrete-time
and digital signals. Topics covered: Introduction to
signals; Continuous time and discrete time signals;
Signal classification and representation; Analysis of
signals including time and frequency domain analysis;
Spectral Analysis, Introduction to Systems; Basic system
description; Linear Time Invariant Systems and their
analysis in the time and frequency domains. Introduction
to filtering including Finite Impulse Response (FIR) and
Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filters.
EEB433 Analogue Electronics Design
The course provides an introduction to analogue
electronic system design. Topics covered: Design of BJT
small-signal amplifiers, Design large-signal amplifiers,
Design of operational amplifiers circuits, Design of
oscillator and timing circuits, Electronic equipment
reliability, Fault diagnostics.
EEB434 Communications Principles
The main aim of this course is to provide the basic
concepts in analogue and digital signal analysis, the
transmission of baseband signals techniques over a
communication channel, and appropriate methods to
retrieve the original message signal. Topics covered:
Signals and systems, Amplitude modulation, Angle
modulation, Detection and Demodulation, Discrete
signals, Receivers, Transmitters, Noise in communication
systems.
EEB435 Computer Programming II
The course covers problem solving concepts, algorithmic
techniques and ideas for solving computational
problems arising frequently in practical applications. It
covers problem specification, algorithmic analysis design,
and implementation in Python. Course Topics: Python
Basics: Algorithm Analysis: Searching and Sorting: Stacks
and Queues, Linked Structures: Recursion: Hash Tables:
Classes, Objects: Inheritance: Concurrent Programming:
Multi processing.
EEB441 Control Systems II
The course aims to develop students’ ability to build,
analyse and design both analogue and digital control
systems. Topics covered: Physical systems, State-space
models of linear systems; Solution of state equations;
State feedback controllers, Digital control systems;
Discrete-time systems stability analysis; Non-linear

systems.
EEB442 Microprocessor Engineering Applications
The course is intended to provide students with
concepts of microcomputer system architecture and
applications to fundamental computer hardware.
Theoretical and practical aspects of interfacing to a
variety of microprocessor peripheral chips with specific
microprocessor /microcomputer systems from both
hardware and software points of view. Topics covered:
Software, Interfacing, Peripherals, External interfaces.
EEB443 Digital Electronics Design
This course introduces digital systems design
concepts. Topics covered include combinational
blocks and design to synchronous digital systems;
design implementation technologies; introduction to
electronic design automation; design testing, hardware
description languages (HDL) and design implementation
technologies.
EEB444 Electronic Experimental Design Laboratory
The course provides a level of competency to
design, perform, analyse, evaluate experiments and
report the results. Emphasis is placed on the tools
and the methodology used to derive knowledge
and understanding of electronics by drawing valid
conclusions from experimental data results. Students are
expected to plan and conduct own experiments guided
by appropriate literature search and a critical evaluation
of the available equipment. The laboratory experiments
are selected from control systems, communication
systems, electronic systems, and digital systems.
EEB451 Power Electronics and Drives
The course provides an introduction to power electronic
devices and their application in speed control of
industrial machines. Topics Covered: Rectifier Circuits,
Thyristor circuits and their controls, Phase-controlled
rectifiers, DC-DC Converters, Application of Rectifiers
and Dc – Dc Converters for speed control of DC motors,
Inverters, Application of Inverters for Induction Motor
Drives (speed control), Cycloconverters and Application
in Synchronous Motor Drive systems (speed control)
EEB453 Power Generation and Control
The course focuses on methods of power generation,
renewable energy and control methods with respect to
power and frequency, voltage and reactive power and
economics of power system generation. Course Topics:
Power Generation Methods, Renewable Energy Sources,
Control of Power and Frequency, Control of Voltage and
Reactive power, Methods of Voltage control
EEB454 Power Transmission and Distribution Networks
The course provides an introduction to power
transmission and distribution. Basic transmission and
distribution concepts are covered. Course Topics: Power
system structure and representation, Transmission
line and cable parameters, Power transfer through a
transmission network, Load forecasting, Distribution
networks, Tariffs, Rural supply networks.
EEB462 Electrical Machines Drives Design
The course is aimed at equipping the student with skills
in Identification and Formulation of Design problem;
Execution of the Design process; and Modelling and
Simulation of the Design work. The design topics will
be focused on Electric Motor Drives. Course Activities:
Selection of Topic on Electric Drive System design,
Project Proposal presentation, First Stage Presentation
of the Design, Final Stage Presentation of the Design,
Reporting.

92

EEB463 Electrical Engineering Laboratory
The course introduces students to the science and
art of conducting practical laboratory investigations
in electrical engineering. Emphasis is placed on the
tools and methodology used to derive knowledge and
understanding of electrical engineering by drawing valid
conclusions from experimental data results. Course
Activities: Pre-laboratory, Experimental investigation and
design, Model implementation and testing (validation
and verification), Laboratory experimentation, Analysis
of results including error analysis, Laboratory report.
EEB464 Power Transmission and Distribution Networks
Design
The course covers the practical aspects that are considered
in planning and designing power transmission and
distribution networks. Electrical and mechanical design
considerations are presented. Course Topics: Electrical
transmission system design principles and procedures,
Mechanical transmission system design principles and
procedures, Group Design Project I, Distribution System
Design, Transmission and Distribution System Design
Case Studies and exercises, Group Design Project II.
EEB465 Power System Analysis
The course aims to enable students to apply basic
engineering laws to power networks, plan and design
power systems network, solve contingency problems
in power systems using engineering tools, operate and
control power systems in relation to power systems
security, optimal operate of power systems and apply
software to solve power network problems. Course
Topics: Basic Concepts, Load Flows, Fault Analysis, Power
Systems Stability.
EEB530 Electronic Design Project I
Selection of project type, its area and scope. Defining
the problem and working out a scheduled action plan.
Knowledge and technical data retrieval from relevant
literature and other information sources, date analysis.
Working out project methodology. Project pre-design
and project proposal. Acquiring the required materials,
software and instrumentation (for experimental studies).
Alternatively it may include preliminary data collection
at an industrial plant. Writing a literature overview and a
progress report. Project presentation.
EEB531 Digital Signal Processing
The course introduces students to digital signal processing
with emphasis on types of signals, characterization and
classification of discrete-time LTI system and properties,
as well as time and frequency-domain analysis. Topics
covered: Signals and Signal Processing, Discrete-Time
Signal and Systems, Discrete-Time Fourier Transform,
Digital Processing of Continuous-Time Signals
EEB532 Computer Architecture and Systems
The course is intended to provide students with an indepth study of computer architecture and design and
to provide them with the basic knowledge and ability
required for understanding and designing standard and
novel computer architectures. Topics covered: Basic
Computer Organisation and CPU Design, Control Unit
Design, Pipelining and Vector Processing, Computer
Arithmetic Design, Input-Output Organisation, Memory
Organisation, Case Studies of Relevant Processors and
Computer Systems
EEB533 Antennas and Wave Propagation
This course introduces the properties of electromagnetic
waves and their propagation through different media.
Fundamental parameters of an antenna and antenna
types are discussed. CAD design/analysis software is used
to investigate the properties of antennas. Topics covered:

Propagation of Electromagnetic waves, Antenna
Characteristics, Radiation Integrals and Potential
Functions, Linear Wire Antennas, Loop Antennas,
Array Antennas, Horn Antennas, Reflector Antennas,
Introduction to CAD, Radar Systems
EEB534 Telephony & Digital Communications
The course provides an introduction to digital
communications and telephony with a focus on
principles of digital communications, types of digital
signals, noise, information theory, error control, coding
theory, teletraffic theory, switching, signaling and
telephone networks. Topics covered: Information Theory,
Coding Theory, Principles of Digital Data Transmission,
Noise in Digital Communications Systems, Telephone
Traffic, Switching and Signaling, Telephone Network.
EEB535 Independent Study Topic
The course develops students’ ability to study and
conduct research independently on a given topic in
Electronic Engineering. The course also re-enforces
the students’ communication skills and the ability to
independently analyse and report self-study material
in a concise manner. Aim: To enable students to define
the scope of the material to be studied, information
sourcing, processing/analysis and presentation through
lecturers.
EEB540 Electronic Design Project II
A continuation of EEB530 Electronic Design Project
I. The course further develops the student’s ability to
formulate, solve problems by applying adequate methods
of analysis, design and development, data processing
in experimental, industrial and numerical studies. The
projects ends with a final report, demonstration and oral
presentation.
EEB541 Advanced Digital Signal Processing
The course provides further background on the DSP
theory and applications and to consolidate material from
DSP I, as well as introduce new concepts. Topics covered:
Discrete Fourier transform, z-Transform, Digital Filter
Structures, Digital Filter Design, Introduction to digital
multirate signal processing.
EEB542 Communication Networks
The course is intended to provide students with a solid
knowledge of computer networks concepts and network
security. Topics covered: Computer Networks and
Internet, Application Layer, Transport Layer, Network
Layer and Routing, Wireless and Mobile Networks,
Security and Network Management.
EEB543 Electromagnetic Wave Guides
The course aims to produce a level of competency in
microwave transmission lines, waveguides as well as
in optical fibre through mathematical rigor. It also
provides an appreciation of the use of the smith Chart in
impedance matching and transformation. Topics covered:
Microwave Transmission Lines, Microwave Waveguides,
Passive Microwave Devices, Active Microwave Devices,
Introduction to Optic Fibres
EEB544 Wireless Communications
The course aims to produce a level of competency in
the Wireless Communications by emphasizing both
mathematical rigor and physical conceptual reasoning,
as applied toward practical engineering problems, with
focus on The Cellular Concepts and Radio propagation
characteristics. Topics covered: Introduction to wireless
communication; Cellular concept; Mobile radio
propagation; Multiple access techniques for wireless
communications, GSM cellular telephony.

EEB550 Electrical Design Project I
The course develops the students’ ability to carry out the
investigation, planning, design, evaluation and analysis
of a particular engineering problem using the knowledge
acquired during lectures, laboratory work, industrial
training and special information pertinent to the selected
project area and gained from such sources as literature,
standards, technical reports, etc. The course also teaches
the students to be able to formulate, solve problems
by applying adequate methods of analysis, design and
development, data processing in experimental, industrial
and numerical studies. Course Topics: Project Proposal
and Work Plan, Oral Presentation of the Project Proposal
and Work Plan, Interim Project Report, Interim Project
Report Presentation,
EEB551 Power System Economics
The course is intended to provide students with the
economic principles and knowledge needed to evaluate
and analyze power market operation, investments
in market assets, and regulation process. Course
Topics: Power System Optimization, Foundations
of Microeconomics, Energy Tariffs, Power Industry
restructuring and Regulation, Electricity trading,
Transmission Business, Transmission & Generation
Investment, Distribution investment.
EEB552 Switchgear and Protection
The course provides fundamental and principles of
switchgear and power system protection. The course
covers the purpose, types, specification, characteristics
and operation of switchgear; Fundamentals of
protection: instrument transformers, relays & over
current protection, biased differential protection, unit
protection, fault calculation and application to protection
systems; earthing and application to protection. Course
Topics: Generator Protection, Transformer Protection,
Bus bar Protection, Feeder Protection, Motor Protection,
Distance Protection.
EEB553 Power System Simulation
The course provides students with analytical,
computational and simulation skills for predicting the
performance of power systems. In addition it provides
an understanding of how power system component
models are described and implemented in computational
methods. The course covers computer methods for
modeling, analysing, computing and simulating power
systems in the steady state and dynamic state. The
coverage includes: formation and computation of
network matrices (Ybus, and Zbus); solution of linear and
non-linear equations, power flow and optimal power
flow studies, programming, fault analysis; transient and
voltage stability analysis and power system contingency
analysis.
EEB554 Electrical Machines
The course presents electrical machines with focus
on the principles of operation and characteristics of
single phase induction motors, synchronous generators/
motors, three-phase transformers, and special purpose
motors. Topics covered: Single-phase induction motors,
Synchronous generators, Asynchronous motors, Three
Phase Transformers, Special Purpose Motors, Singlephase motors, Synchronous Generators, Synchronous
motors.
EEB555 Self Study Topic
The course develops students’ ability to study and
conduct research independently on a given topic in
Electrical Engineering. The course also re-enforces
the students’ communication skills and the ability to
independently analyse and report self-study material

93

in a concise manner. Aim: To enable students to define
the scope of the material to be studied, information
sourcing, processing/analysis and presentation through
lecturers.
EEB560 Electrical Design Project II
A continuation of EEB550 Electrical Design Project I.
The course further develops the student’s ability to
formulate, solve problems by applying adequate methods
of analysis, design and development, data processing
in experimental, industrial and numerical studies. The
projects ends with a final report, demonstration and oral
presentation.
EEB561 Power System Operation
The course deals with power systems operation and
control under classical and deregulated paradigms. While
the principles of power system operation stay the same,
the goals, constraints, responsibilities, and environment
have changed or are still evolving. The coverage
consists of: power system operation in a competitive
environment, economic scheduling, unit commitment,
state estimation, contingency analysis, optimal power
flow, load forecasting, load frequency control, automatic
generation control, automatic voltage regulation and
control through the energy control center or energy
management system (EMS).
EEB562 High Voltage Engineering
The course provides an introduction to high voltage
engineering. Basic high voltage engineering concepts
are covered. Theories, practices and procedures of high
voltage engineering are presented. Topics covered:
Breakdown mechanisms, Lightning overvoltages, Faults
overvoltages, Energisation overvoltages, Overvoltages
Mitigation Measures, Generation of high voltages,
Measurement of high voltages and currents, Testing,
Applications
EEB563 Power System planning
The course covers topics that are important in the
planning of electrical power systems. These include
power system planning strategies and frameworks;
integrated resource planning process; load forecasting;
demand side management options; bulk power
generation expansion, transmission and distribution
expansion options; production cost optimization;
environmental, reliability and economic issues; electricity
trading and markets; regulation and de-regulation.
EEB564 Electrical Machines Drives
The course presents advanced concepts on various
Electric Machines drives through modeling and analysis.
It covers DC motor drives, AC motor drives, vector control
of Induction machines, synchronous motor drives and
special machines drives.
ITB440 Industrial Training II
Structure and layout of the organization; All/selected
topics from: Office/site organisation and layout;
purchasing and warehousing; manufacture, fabrication
and assembly; building and construction; costing,
estimating and tendering; operations; maintenance;
plant erection, installation and testing, information
system/design studio, involvement in small design
assignments and projects.
CURRENT COURSES
EEB411 Electronic Devices and Circuits
Operational Amplifiers theory; Op-amp circuits; Positive
feedback; Power Amplifiers; Power devices; converters
and inverters, Optoelectronic devices, analogue filters.

EEB412 Digital Electronics II
Combinational circuits; Sequential circuits; Shift Register
circuits and operation; Application Specific Integrated
Circuits (ASICs).
EEB413 Power Generation and Distribution Transmission
Lines; Power generation; Power control; Distributors;
Distribution equipment; Supply irregularities.
EEB414 Electrical Machines II
Three Phase Transformers. Three-Phase Synchronous
Generators. Three-Phase Synchronous Motors. SinglePhase Motors. Micro-machines. Levitated machines.
EEB415 Digital Communications and Telephony
Principles of Digital Data Transmission, Noise in Digital
Communications Systems, Information Theory, Coding
Theory, Telephone Traffic, Switching and Signalling,
Telephone Network.
EEB416 Electrical Measurements and Instrumentation II
Electronic Instruments, Oscilloscope measurements,
Calibration of Instruments, Transducers, Signal
Conditioning
EEB417 Microprocessor Based Systems
Microprocessor
based
system
Microprocessor
Instruction
and
Microprocessor Applications

components;
Programming;

ITB420 Industrial Training II
Structure and layout of the organization; All/selected
topics from: Office/site organisation and layout;
purchasing and warehousing; manufacture, fabrication
and assembly; building and construction; costing,
estimating and tendering; operations; maintenance;
plant erection, installation and testing, information
system/design studio, involvement in small design
assignments and projects.
EEB511 Control Theory II
State-space models of linear systems; Solution of state
equations; Digital control systems; Discrete-time systems
stability analysis; Non-linear systems
EEB512 Digital Signal Processing I
Types of Signals; Time Domain Analysis; Frequency
Domain Analysis; Z-Transform; Design of Non-recursive
Digital Filter; Design of Recursive Digital Filter.
EEB513 Analogue Electronic System Design Approximate
Diode Models; BJT Small-Signal Amplifiers; Large-Signal
Amplifiers; Operational Amplifiers; Compensation
Amplifier Systems; Oscillator and Timing Circuits; Power
Supply Circuits; Electronic Equipment Reliability and
Fault Diagnosis.
EEB514 Process Instrumentation
Analog/digital signal conditioning and transmission;
Optical measurements; Measurements of process
parameters; Analytical Measurements; Control valves
and actuators; Instrumentation systems; Smart/
intelligent transducer systems
EEB515 Power Systems
Representation of power systems. Fault studies. Load
flow studies. Control of power and frequency. Economic
dispatch. Power system stability studies. Protective
schemes.
EEB516 Power Electronics
Rectifier circuits; Thyristor circuits and controls;
Converters; Inverters. Filters.

EEB517 Computer-Aided Electrical Machine Analysis
Modeling of Electrical Machines. Multi-machine System
Analysis. Simulation and Applications.
EEB518 Guided Electromagnetic Waves
Microwave Transmission Lines; Microwave Waveguides;
Passive Microwave Devices; Active Microwave Devices;
Introduction to Optical Fibres.
EEB519 Computer Architecture and Design
Design methodology; ALU design; Memory organization
and design; Control organization and design; RISC
processing and pipelining.
EEB510
Project (Stage 1)
Selection of project type, its area and scope. Defining
the problem and working out a scheduled action
plan. Knowledge and technical data retrieval form
relevant literature and other information sources, date
analysis. Working out project methodology. Project predesign. Acquiring the required materials, software and
instrumentation (for experimental studies). Alternatively
it may include preliminary data collection at an industrial
plant. Writing a literature overview and a progress report.
Project presentation.
EEB520 Project (Stage II)
This is the continuation of the course EEB510
EEB522 Digital Signal Processing II
Filters derived from analogue designs; Fourier
Transform; FFT Processing; Adaptive Filtering; Hardware
Implementation of Digital Filters; DSP applications to
Communications; DSP applications in Multi-Media
EEB523 Digital Electronic System Design Course
Synopsis:
Programmable Devices; Finite State Machines; System
Design Using Programmable devices. Asynchronous
Circuits. Reed-Muller algebraic description.
EEB524 Process Control Systems
Process control principles; Techniques for process
control; Controllers; Computer Control systems; Control
Communications; Statistical process and quality control
systems (SPC-SPQ); Expert Systems
EEB525 Power Systems Analysis
Overhead lines. Insulators. Performance of long
transmission lines. Underground cables. Circuit breakers.
Power transients
EEB526 Electrical Machines and Drives
Selection of drive components. DC motor drives.
Adjustable Dc motor drives. Induction motor drives.
Adjustable speed AC Motor drives. Synchronous motor
drives.
EEB527 Computer-Aided Power Systems Analysis
Modeling Power System Components. Power Flow
Studies. Fault calculations. Stability. Energy Control
Centre.
EEB528 Antennas and Propagation
Fundamental parameters of Antennas; Radiation
Integrals and Potential Functions; Linear Wire Antennas;
Loop Antennas; Array Antennas; Horn Antennas;
Reflector Antennas; Propagation of Electromagnetic
waves in Infinite Media. Radar Systems.
EEB529 Computer Networks
Network architecture and topology, ISO reference model,

94

Network layer for point-to-point networks, Wide Area
Network, Internetworking concept and architecture
model, Internet.
In addition to the above, the department of Electrical
and Electronic Engineering also offers the following
General Education Courses (GEC)

DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL
DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY

Special Regulations for the Degree in Bachelor of Design
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations 000,
100 and 200, the following Special Regulations shall
apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission into Level 100 shall be possession of BGCSE
or equivalent with a minimum of C in Design and
Technology or Art and Design or equivalent qualification,
and a minimum of grade D in English language, a grade
C in Mathematics, and either a minimum of grade C in
Physics or a minimum grade BB in Science Double award
or equivalent.
Applicants in possession of an appropriate A-level
qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics and
any one of Physics, Chemistry, or Design and Technology
may be admitted directly into Level 200 but will take
Level 100 courses if necessary.
Applicants in possession of an appropriate Diploma
may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the Degree
Programme.
Admission into Level 300 shall be possession of
appropriate higher (or a three-year) Diploma/Associate
degree in Design and Technology/Industrial Design/
Graphic Design/Interior Design/Furniture Design or any
other design related and equivalent programmes.
Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of Design
(Industrial Design) Programme
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations
000 and 200 and the Faculty Special Regulations 230
the following Departmental Regulations for the B Des.
(Industrial Design) shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Bachelor of Design (Industrial Design)
programme shall be as stipulated in Faculty Special
Regulations 23.10, i.e., 23.11 to 23.17
Degree Structure
The Programme shall consist of a single major subject
called ‘Industrial Design’.
The curriculum for Level 100 to 500 is as follows:
Semester 1
Core Courses
IBC 110
Design Fundamentals (3 credits)
IBC 111
Elements & Principles of Design (3 credits)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics & Mechanics, Vibrations
Waves (4 credits)
MAT 191 Design Mathematics I (3 credits)
ICT 121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2 credits)
COM 131 Introduction to Communication & Academic
Literacy Skills (3 credits)
Semester 2
IBC 120
Design Materials & Processes I (3 credits)
IBC 121
Graphical Communication I (3 credits)
PHY 122 Electricity, Magnetism & Elements of
Modern Physics (4 credits)

MAT 192 Design Mathematics II (3 credits)
ICT 122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2 credits)
COM 132 Academic and Professional Communication
(3 credits)
Semester 3
IBC 210
Design Materials & Processes II (3 credits,
pre-requisite IBC 120)
IBC 211
Design for Sustainability (3)
IBC 212
Graphical Communication II (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 121)
IBC 213
History of Art & Design (3)
IBC 214
Product Design Studio: Electronics (3)
Semester 4
IBC220
Graphical Communication & Multimedia (3
credits, pre-requisite IBC 212)
IBC 221
Product Styling (3 credits, pre-requisite IBC
212)
IBC 223
Physical Ergonomics (3 credits)
IBC 224
Design Studio: Structures & Mechanisms (3)
MKT 100 Principles of Marketing (3 credits)
Winter Semester
IBC200
Industrial Design Attachment (8 weeks), (4)
Semester 5
IBI 310
Design Futures (3 credits, pre-requisite IBC
211)
IBI 311
Intellectual Property Rights (3 credits)
IBC 311
Computer Aided Design Fundamentals (3
credits, pre-requisite IBC 220)
IBC 312
Design Research (3 credits)
IBC 313
Product Design & Analysis (3 credits)
IBC 314
Occupational Health & Safety in Design (3
credits)
Semester 6
IBC321
Computer-Aided Manufacture (3 credits,
pre-requisite IBC 311)
IBC322
Design Control Technology (3 credits)
IBI321
Integrated Design Practice (3 credits)
IBC323
Design Studio: Cognitive Ergonomics (3
credits)
IBC324
Service Design for Sustainability (3 credits)
Winter Semester
IBI 300
Industrial Design Attachment (8 weeks), (4
credits)
Semester 7
IBI 410
Design & Entrepreneurship (3 credits, prerequisite IBI 310
IBC 411
Design Studio: Textile Design (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 323)
IBI 412
Interior Product Design I (3 credits)
MGT 202 Small Business Management (3 credits)
In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 413
Design for Print (3 credits)
IBC 412
Design Control Technology II (3 credits)
Semester 8
IBC 421
Design Studio: Design for All (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 411)
IBC 422
Branding & Package Design (3 credits, prerequisite IBI 410)
Select an Elective/GEC
In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 423
Microcomputers Control for Designers
IBC 424
Advanced Computer Aided Design (3 credits,

pre-requisite IBC 311)
In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBI
422 Ceramic Design (3)
IBC
425 System Design for Sustainability (3
credits, pre-requisite IBC 413)
Winter Semester
IBI400
Industrial Design Attachment (8 weeks), (4
credits, pre-requisite IBI 300)

c) A Design and Make Project shall be evaluated as
specified in Regulations 23.33a and 23.33b.
23.34 The Level 500 Project Report must be submitted
to the Co-coordinator at least 1 week before the
beginning of the end of semester examinations.
Where a course includes a written final examination, a
course with a credit value of 3 or more shall be examined
by an end of semester examination of duration 2 hours,
and 1 hour for a course with less than 3 credits.

		
Semester 9
IBC511
Major Design Project I: Research & 		
Conceptualisation (6 credits, pre-requisite
IBC 421)
IBI 511 Emerging Issues in Design (3)
Select an Elective/GEC
In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 512
Interactive Design (3)
IBI 513
Advanced Ceramic Design (3)

Courses having a practical component or drawing that
include a written examination shall be examined by an
end of semester examination of duration 3 hours.
Due Dates and Tests
a) Failure without good cause to submit an item of
continuous assessment within 24 hours of the due date
shall carry a penalty of 5 percentage marks per day.
Failure to submit the assignment before the end of 1
week from the due date shall incur a zero mark.

Semester 10
IBC521
Major Design Project II: Prototyping (6
credits, pre-requisite IBC 511)
Select an Elective/GEC
In addition, all students shall select at least two of the
following optional courses:
MGT 303 Entrepreneurship & New Business Formation
(3 credits)
IBI 521
Environmental Communication Design (3 )
IBI 522
Interior Product Design II (3)
Students registered for a Bachelor of Design Degree
Programme shall undergo industrial training as specified
under Departmental Special Regulations.
At Levels 300, 400 and 500 each student shall register for
Electives and General Education Courses as prescribed by
General Regulation 00.2124, Departmental prescribed
number of core, optional and elective courses per
semester, unless exempted.
The availability of optional and elective courses offered
by a Department shall be at the discretion of the
Department.
A subject may include courses consisting entirely of
fieldwork, project work, practical work, and seminars.
In addition to work during the semester, a subject may
include prescribed fieldwork or assignments during the
vacation periods.
Assessment
Continuous assessment in Levels 100, 200, 300, 400 and
500 courses shall be based on tests and/or assignments,
and where applicable laboratory reports/field reports,
models/prototypes and design projects.
Except for a project and courses with 100 percent
continuous assessment, the ratio of continuous
assessment to end of semester examination shall be 2:3,
unless otherwise, specified in the Departmental Special
Regulations.
Project Assessment
a) A Design Project shall be assessed through
documentation (folio, report and diary) of the
Design Process and presentation. The ratio of marks
for documentation to presentation shall be 2:1.
b) A Major Project shall be assessed through Product
and its Evaluation and presentation. The ratio of
marks for documentation to presentation shall be
2:1.

95

b) A student who fails to sit a continuous assessment
test without documented valid reason shall score a zero
mark for that test. A student absent from a test with
documented legitimate reason shall be entitled to a
special test.
Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of Design
(Design and Technology Education) Programme
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations 000
and 200 and the Faculty Special Regulation 230, the
following Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of
Design (Design and Technology Education) programme
shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
90.11 Admission to the Bachelor of Design (Design and
Technology Education) Degree shall be as stipulated in
Faculty Special Regulation 23.10, i.e., 23.11 to 23.17.
Programme Structure
The Programme shall consist of the Major Subject called
‘Design and Technology’ and the Minor Subject called
‘Education’.
The curriculum for Levels 100 to 500 is as follows:
Level 100
Design and Technology Education Programme
Semester 1
Core Courses
IBC 110
Design Fundamentals (3 credits)
IBC 111
Elements & Principles of Design (3)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics & Mechanics, Vibrations
Waves (4 credits)
MAT 191 Design Mathematics I (3)
ICT 121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
COM 131 Introduction to Communication & Academic
Literacy Skills (3)
Semester 2
IBC 120
Design Materials & Processes I (3 credits)
IBC 121
Graphical Communication I (3 credits)
PHY 122 Electricity, Magnetism & Elements of
Modern Physics (4 credits)
MAT192 Design Mathematics II (3 credits)
ICT 122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2 credits)
COM 132 Academic and Professional Communication
(3 credits)
Semester 3
IBC 210
Design Materials & Processes II (3 credits,
pre-requisite IBC 120)
IBC 211
Design for Sustainability (3)
IBC 212
Graphical Communication II (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 121)

IBC 213
IBC 214
EFP 101

History of Art & Design (3)
Product Design Studio: Electronics (3 credits)
Foundations of Development Psychology

Semester 4
IBC 220
Graphical Communication & Multimedia (3
credits, pre-requisite IBC 212)
IBC 221
Product Styling (3 credits, pre-requisite IBC
212)
IBC 223
Physical Ergonomics (3 credits)
IBC 224
Design Studio: Structures & Mechanisms (3
credits)
EFF 220
Historical, Philosophical & Sociological
Foundations of Education (3 credits)
Winter Semester
IBC 200
Industrial Design Attachment (8 weeks), (4
credits)
Semester 5
IBC 311
Computer Aided Design Fundamentals (3
credits, pre-requisite IBC 220)
IBC 312
Design Research (3 credits)
IBC 313
Product Design & Analysis (3)
IBC 314
Occupational Health & Safety in Design (3)
IBD 311
Teaching Design & Technology (3)
EFP 100
Introduction to Educational Psychology
Semester 6
IBC 321
Computer-Aided Manufacture (3 credits,
pre-requisite IBC 311)
IBC 322
Design Control Technology (3 credits)
IBC 323
Design Studio: Cognitive Ergonomics (3)
IBC 324
Service Design for Sustainability (3 credits)
EFC 300 Curriculum Studies (3 credits)
Winter Semester
ETP 200 School Teaching Practice (7 weeks), (3 credits)

credits)
Semester 9
IBC511
Major Design Project I: Research & 		
Conceptualisation (6 credits, pre-requisite
IBC 421)
EDT 511
Research Essay in D&T (4 credits)
Select an Elective/GEC
In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 512
Interactive Design (3 credits)
IBD 512
D&T Curriculum Innovations (3 credits)
IBD 513
Motion Design
Semester 10
IBC 521
Major Design Project II: Prototyping (6
credits, pre-requisite IBC 511)
EFA 500 School Management (3 credits)
Select an Elective/GEC
In addition, all stude s shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
EFH 560 Guidance and Counselling (3 credits)
EFH 430 Philosophical Analysis of Education
Concepts and Policies (3 credits)
EFR 500 Measurement & Evaluation (3 credits)
Assessment
Assessment for courses offered by other faculties,
e.g. Education, will be as stipulated in their Faculty/
Departmental Regulations.
Service Courses
GEC357 Advances in Technology (2): Examinable:
CA: Exam Ratio as per FET Regulations
GEC 258 Art and Science of Design (2): Examinable:
CA: Exam Ratio as per FET Regulations
Industrial Training Regulations for the Degree of
Bachelor of Design Preamble

In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 412
Design Control Technology II (3 credits)
IBC 413
Design for Print Media (3 credits)
Semester 8
IBC 421
Design Studio: Design for All (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 411)
EFR 200 Introduction to Educational Research (3
credits)
IBD 421
Contemporary Issues in Design & 		
Technology (3 credits)

a) Bachelor of Design (Design and Technology 		
Education)
b) Bachelor of Design (Industrial Design)

In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 422
Branding & Package Design (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 413)
IBC 425
System Design for Sustainability (3 credits,
pre-requisite IBC 324)
		
Winter Semester
ETP 300 School Teaching Practice (7 weeks), (4

A student’s performance will be assessed by means of:
a) Continuous assessment by the industry based
supervisor and an assessor from a relevant Department
of the Faculty of Engineering and Technology.
b) Industrial Training Report and logbook submitted by
the student at the end of the Industrial Training period.
c) Oral Presentation for IBI 400 only.
IBI 400 shall be assessed as based on regulations 35.22
(IBI 400 a and b). The ratio of marks for Continuous
Assessment to Industrial Training Report and Logbook
shall be 2:1
COURSE LISTING
FOR ALL OTHER COURSES NOT OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT PLEASE CONSULT THE RELAVENT
DEPARTMENT FOR THE SYNOPSIS
Bachelor of
Descriptions

Semester 7
IBC 411
Design Studio: Textile Design (3 credits, prerequisite IBC 323)
EFR 300 Classroom Assessment (3 credits)
EDT 411
Educational Technology Basics (3 credits)
Select an Elective/GEC

In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
IBC 423
Microcomputers Control for Designers
IBC 424
Advanced Computer Aided Design (3
credits, pre-requisite IBC 311)

Assessment
During the periods of Industrial Training, each student
shall be visited a minimum of twice at the location of
placement to be assessed by Faculty of Engineering and
Technology staff.

Subject to the provisions of General Regulations 000 and
200 the following Industrial Training Regulations shall
apply to students on the following Programmes:

Structure
BDes (Design and Technology Education) and BDes
(Industrial Design) students shall undergo supervised
Industrial Training for 8 weeks between Levels 200 and
Industrial Training course codes shall be as follows:
IBC 200 - Industrial Training (BDes Design and
Technology Education and B Des. Industrial Design)
duration 8 weeks, 4 credits, core course. IBI 300 and 400
- Industrial Training for BDes. Industrial Design students
for 8 weeks respectively, 4 credits, core course.
During the periods of Industrial Training students shall
be subjected to such codes, procedures, laws, rules, and
other regulations as applicable to the industry.
Subject to Regulations Governing Admissions, Fees and
Discipline Regulation 4.0, and regulation 35.13 above,
a student who receives a final warning for misconduct
during the period of Industrial Training shall be subjected
to Discipline Regulations.

96

Design

(Industrial

Design)

Course

IBC 110 Design Fundamentals (3 credits)
The course introduce students to applied creativity as a
discipline. This is a cognitive course that introduces and
equips students with design synthesis and sense-making
skills, preparing them for other creative processes
later in the programme. It provides cross-disciplinary
knowledge and understanding of applied creativity and
its applications in problem and opportunity framing and
problem solving (2-hrs lecture, 2-hrs practical per week).
IBC 111 Elements & Principles of Design (3 credits)
The course is intended to equip students with foundation
skills, core building blocks and resources of design theory
and practice ranging across all platforms of the discipline.
It equips students with basic design principles, laws,
guidelines, human biases and the psychology of visual
perception. It provides cross-disciplinary knowledge and
understanding of design theories and applications. (2hrs lecture, 2-hrs practical per week)
PHY 112 Geometrical Optics & Mechanics, Vibrations
Waves (4 credits)
This course is intended to introduce students to the
basic concepts of mechanics, energy, electricity and
magnetism as well as to the technical and technological
interactions between physical sciences and product
design. (2-hrs lecture, 2-hr practical and 1 hr tutorial per
week)
MAT 191 Design Mathematics I (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to introduce students to
foundation topics and techniques from Algebra,
Trigonometry and Statistics, which will help the students
appreciate the role of Mathematics in Industrial Design
Education (1-hr2 lecture, 2-hrs practical per week).
IBC 120 Design Materials & Processes I (3 credits)
This course aims to enable students to employ different
workshop processes when using standard materials such
as wood, plastics and metals.
IBC 121 Graphical Communication I (3 credits)
This course aims to develop students’ ability to

demonstrate their acquired knowledge and skills
(competence) of various ways of manual visual
communication approaches used by industrial designers.
It focuses on design ideas presentation (using visual
communication approaches), form and surface finish
presentation techniques.

for aesthetics in designing. General principles and
dimensions of aesthetics. Overall visual impact and
product appeal. Stylising a product for different images.
Overall visual appeal and product acceptance. Analysis
of existing products vis-à-vis aesthetics. Design of
decorative objects.

PHY 122 Electricity, Magnetism & Elements of Modern
Physics Design Fundamentals (4 credits)
This first year course is intended to introduce students to
the basic concepts of mechanics, energy, electricity and
magnetism as well as to the technical and technological
interactions between physical sciences and product
design.

IBC 223 Physical Ergonomics (3 credits)
This course aims to provide students with ergonomics/
human factors knowledge and skills focussed on
industrial design with an emphasis on human-artefact
interface and usability techniques.

MAT 192 Design Mathematics II (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to introduce students to
some ideas and techniques from coordinate geometry,
determinants, matrices and calculus, which will help the
students appreciate the role of Mathematics in Industrial
Design Education.
IBC 210 Design Materials and Processes II (3 credits)
The course covers the following components: Materials
and Design: Atomic structure, arrangement and
imperfections. Mechanical and physical properties
of materials, Principles of solidification and phase
diagrams, Ferrous and non-ferrous alloys, Ceramic
materials, Polymers, Composite materials, Wood,
environmental stability of materials, materials failure,
Design implications.
IBC 211 Design for Sustainability (3 credits)
Sustainability is a powerful organising strategy and a
future state. This course aims to develop awareness in
sustainability issues linked to product, service and systems
design. It provides a panoramic view of sustainability and
design across all the three main areas of sustainability of
people, environment and the economy.
IBC 212 Graphical Communication II (3 credits)
This course aims to develop students’ ability to
demonstrate their acquired knowledge and skills
(competence) of various ways of manual to digital visual
communication approaches used by industrial designers.
It focuses on design presentation (using digital visual
communication approaches), form and surface finish
presentation techniques, heavily interfacing manual
techniques learnt in IBC 111.
IBC 213 History of Art and Design (3 credits)
The course aims to equip students with basic knowledge
of the development of art and design through time and
space.
IBC 214 Design Studio: Electronics (3 credits)
Students will appreciate the importance of form,
function and user interface in the design of consumer
products as well as correctly house electronic circuits,
i.e. shaping PCBs to fit in ergonomic cases; use of PCB
mounting posts, ventilation holes to allow air circulation;
provision for maintain and repair products etc.
IBC 220 Graphical Communication & Multimedia (3
credits)
The course introduces students to the basic principles
of Visual Communications such as colour theories and
printing processes. The course also prepares students
for advanced levels of professional employment
as communication designers in the areas of brand
architecture, print communication, desktop publishing,
design planning and information design.
IBC 221 Product Styling 220 (3 credits)
The course is aimed at creating a sense and feel

IBC 224
Design Studio: Structures & Mechanisms
Design (3 credits)
The course aims at enabling students to design and
analyse simple structures and mechanisms and how they
interact with products.

MKT 100 Principles of Marketing (3 credits)
The course covers: introduction to marketing, Marketing
management orientations, Marketing environment,
Buyer behaviour, Organizational buyer behaviour and
its influences, Marketing mix elements: Product, Pricing,
Promotion Mix and
place/distribution, Marketing
strategy development: Market segmentation and Market
targeting, Market positioning, Marketing of services,
Marketing information systems and Global market place.
IBC 200 Industrial Design Training (3 credits)
The course aims to enable students to employ the
skills they learnt during their study and to acquire new
skills in the area of design and technology. This course
concentrates on industrial exposure for students to gain
practical experience, hence sharing their knowledge
with industry. In doing so, they should enhance their
knowledge and practical skills on the one hand and
critique the processes and methods used in the industry
on the other.
IBI 310 Design Futures (3 credits)
The aim of the course is to develop an awareness of
the cultural, historical and critical contexts in which
designing takes place. It also seeks to provide an
understanding of the Art and Science of Design. This
course is a springboard from which students can develop
creative and innovative ideas.
IBI 311 Intellectual Property Rights (3 credits)
The aim of the course is to develop an in-depth
understanding of intellectual property rights, thus
appreciating open source development and the ideas
deriving from the creative commons.
IBC 311 Computer-Aided Design Fundamentals (3 credits)
This course aims to introduce the students to the
application of information and communication
technology in the field of design. The course will equip
the students with the skill of applying computer 3D
software in producing and presenting design concepts.
IBC 312 Design Research (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to develop an in-depth
understanding of research methods, which are specific
to the field of design, particularly Industrial Design to
enable designers to enhance the practice of design. The
course seeks to develop skills associated with identifying
a problem, collecting data, analysing and interpreting
the data and produce a design report.
IBC 313 Product Design & Analysis (3 credits)
Analysis of existing designs is a prerequisite to creating
innovative designs. This course prepares the students

97

to analyse existing products systematically. It dwells
on form, function, performance, materials, innovations
and life-cycle factors for analysis. Apart from some
new concepts like product architecture, golden ratio,
functional analysis and life-cycle sustainability, it
employs the principles already learnt in a previous
course.
IBC 314 Occupational Health and Safety in Design (3
credits)
The course aims at providing specific and in-depth
knowledge of safety in the workplace and first aid, and
factors related to occupational and personal health.
IBC 321 Computer Aided Design and Manufacture (3
credits)
This course aims to develop competency in Computer
Aided Design and Manufacture and to apply it to design,
simulate and produce a prototype. It also introduces
students to advanced methods of manufacturing.
IBC 322 Design Control Technology I (3 credits)
This is an introductory course designed for students to
familiarise themselves with the fundamental principles
that underpin the design of simple technological systems
or devices. The course is intended to provide students
with some insights into the working principles of control
systems such as mechanical, electronic, and pneumatic
and how they may be integrated and incorporated into
different consumer products.
IBI 321 Integrated Design Practice (3 credits)
This course aims to develop an understanding of
creative thinking techniques and tools within the
context of design processes. It also aims to enhance an
understanding of the fundamentals and methods of
the design process with emphasis on creative thinking
and problem solving techniques and the importance
of understanding the value of mapping, analysing and
developing strategies on how to collaborate with and
engage a wide range of stakeholders.
IBC 323 Design Studio: Cognitive Ergonomics (3 credits)
This course aims to provide students with ergonomics/
human factors knowledge and skills focussed on
industrial design with an emphasis on human-artefact
interface and usability techniques.
IBC 324 Service Design for Sustainability (3 credits)
Service design presents a possibility to address
unsustainability in industrial design practice by shifting
the focus from design of disintegrated products and
interactions to an integrated approach within complex
systems. This course aims to develop knowledge of
service design theory and awareness of service design
practices across different contexts of service designing.
IBI 300 Industrial Design Training (3 credits)
The aim of this second block of Industrial Design
Training is to enable students to build further skills they
learnt during the study in their programme to acquire
further skills in the area of design and technology. It
concentrates on industrial exposure for students to gain
practical experience, hence acquiring knowledge from
industry.
IBI 410 Design and Entrepreneurship (3 credits)
The course focuses on providing a basic understanding
of design entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship as well
as the principles of finding one’s place in various existing
value chains.
IBC 411 Design Studio: Textile Design (3 credits)
The aim of the course is to enable students to employ
different textile manufacturing processes on apparel

materials and specify and select textile for different
purposes in relation to their properties. Students will
also acquire knowledge and experience of using textile
materials and techniques to enhance existing products
and or create innovative ones.
IBI 412 Interior Product Design I (3 credits)
The course aims to introduce the role of interior
design in everyday life of the people, and its role in the
professional practice of the designers. It has to enhance
students’ capability in providing better quality of human
life through the design and production of interior
design and its elements. The course aims at the design
and manufacturing of furniture in synergy with other
interior design elements.
MGT 202 Small Business Management (3 credits)
This course aims at introducing students to fundamentals
of small business management and operations. This will
take students through the formation of businesses and
business forms. It seeks to expose them, through case
studies to the realities of being in business and to help
them merge theory with practice. It will also bring to
light the available funding models that small businesses
can adopt. Financial planning and management eludes
many small business owners, which make it an equally
important aspect which shall be covered during the
course. Location and marketing issues shall be covered
together with family business dynamics.
IBC 413 Editorial Design (3 credits)
The course aims to equip students with diverse skills in
design for print media, both conceptual and technical.
It fosters to build a platform for conceptual problem
solving and technical applications of visual messages,
to design and communicate effective visual experiences
and design systems. With an industry-oriented focus,
the course aims to equip students with strategic and
managerial skills over and beyond design applications
and learn the underlying skills in the psychology of
design for print, visual perception, electronic pre-press
and print production.
IBC 412 Design Control Technology II (3 credits)
This is an advanced course designed to extend students’
knowledge and understanding of the design of
technological systems. The course is intended to provide
students with deeper insight into the working principles
of control systems such as mechanical, electronic
and pneumatics, and their integration into consumer
products through practical implementation.
IBC 421 Design Studio: Design for All (3 credits)
This course seeks to improve the usability of
environments, products and systems for the widest
range of people. It is grounded in the democratic values
of non-discrimination, equal opportunity and personal
empowerment. The primary aim of Design for All is about
putting people first. It’s about designing for the needs
of people with permanent, temporary, situational, or
changing disabilities – thus all of us.
IBC 422 Branding & Packaging Design (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to create a holistic
understanding of packaging of products with regard to
their design, manufacture, legislation and environmental
issues. The course seeks to develop skills associated with
entrepreneurship and teamwork.
IBC 423 Microcomputer Control for Designers (3 credits)
This studio-based course is designed to extend
students’ knowledge and understanding in the use

of microprocessor based computer systems including
microcontrollers and to learn how to utilize their power
by programming and interfacing them with basic input
and output peripherals to provide automated control.
Students will produce working prototypes of computer
controlled systems or devices to meet a range of problemsolving contexts identified within their setting.
IBC 424 Computer Aided Design II (3 credits)
This course aims to developed students who have
mastered the basics of parametric solid model design but
need to continue building skills for working with imported
models, surface modelling, FEA, model analysis, design
presentation and publishing and creating e-Drawings.
This course aims to develop further Computer Aided
Design competency to an advanced level and to apply it
in the operation and management of integrated design
and manufacturing systems.
IBI 421 Ceramic Design (3 credits)
This practical studio based course is designed to
introduce students to ceramics, general information
on clay properties to fired ceramic products. Emphasis
is placed on hand building and slab processes and the
use of simple techniques, with attention given to the
dynamics of ceramic forms. Students will be able to
achieve proficiency in a range of inventive techniques
and decorative processes. The general historical evolution
of ceramics and the business opportunities related to
ceramics production.
IBC 425 System Design for Sustainability (3 credits)
This course aims at advancing students’ knowledge and
skills on issues related to system design for sustainability.
The course builds on the foundation knowledge students
have learnt about the design of products, services and
systems by employing the right design approaches
advancing from the design of individual products to the
design of systems.
IBC 400 Industrial Design Training (4 credits)
The aim of this last block of Industrial Design Training
is to enable students to master skills they learnt during
their study period and to acquire further skills in the
area of design with applications in technology. It
concentrates on industrial awareness for students to
gain practical experience, hence making contribution to
the industry. In doing so, they should gain confidence
in their knowledge and practical skills and critique the
logistics, processes and methods used in the industry and
make positive contributions.
IBC 511 Major Design Project I: Research &
Conceptualisation (6 credits)
The aim of the course is to develop design capability
through conceiving appropriate products, systems or
services. The course also develops and fosters creative
and imaginative capabilities in designing.
IBI 511 Emerging Issues in Design (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to develop an in-depth
understanding and analytical skills on the current
debates in Industrial Design practice and education. The
course seeks to develop lifelong learning skills.
IBC 512 Interactive Design (3 credits)
To equip students with a professional level of
competence in information architecture and design,
content management, user–experience and userinterface design. This course equips students with
the skills to plan, design, build and promote effective
experiences and user interfaces. The aim is to provide a
balanced skill acquisition in the three main aspects of

98

interaction design and content management: technical,
functional and aesthetic. Students’ competence will be
demonstrated by delivery of fully functioning products.
IBI 513 Advanced Ceramic Design (3 credits)
The course introduces students to designing and
producing highly refined products that take into
consideration the social, cultural and users’ lifestyles,
market forces and manufacturing opportunities. It
equips students with the necessary techniques and
information to start their own business.
IBC 521 Major Design Project II: Prototying (3 credits)
The aim of the course is to develop students’ capability
to realise their designs done is semester one by using
appropriate manufacturing and finishing processes
whilst observing good working practices in the workshop.
The course also seeks to develop students’ practical and
manipulative skills as well as the capability to work
independently.
MGT 303 Entrepreneurship & New Business Formation
(3 credits)
This course aims to provide students with an
understanding of the theories and principles of
entrepreneurship. It also develops the necessary skills to
start and manage projects of an entrepreneurial nature
as well as providing a set of critical skills for properly
analyzing and assessing entrepreneurial opportunities
and projects.
IBI 521 Environmental Communication Design (3 credits)
This course is tailored to promote fluency in
Environmental, Exhibition & Signage Design. Students
will explore basic design and representational
techniques and develop their own drawing skills as a
medium of creative exploration, for artistic, design and
communication objectives. Other issues such as space,
graphics, lighting, proportion, construction, context,
visibility, materiality, approach and visibility will be
discussed. Brand - Image - Experience will be introduced
and discussed in the studio. Introduction to numerous
aspects of illumination, lighting, colour & textures.
Students will formulate a presentation of their project
through analysis and evaluation of 3D presentation
techniques.
IBI 522 Interior Design II (3 credits)
The course aims to advance the role of interior design in
everyday life of the people, and its role in the professional
practice of designers. It enhances students’ capability in
providing better quality of human life through the design
and production of interior designs and their elements.
Bachelor of Design (Design & Technology Education)
Course Descriptions
Most of the courses are common between the Bachelor
of Design (Industrial Design), and Bachelor of Design
(Design & Technology Education) programmes. For
common courses (IBC), refer to the Bachelor of Design
(Industrial Design) programme. The education courses
will be listed under the Faculty of Education.
IBD 311 Teaching Design and Technology (3 credits)
This course is a professional studies component of
design and technology, which provides and develops
in students’ sound pedagogical knowledge and skills of
handling design and technology learning and teaching
environments in schools. The course seeks to provide
and develop an appreciation of the teacher’s role as a
manager of the learning situation. To this end it aims
to promote student-awareness of the interaction aspects
of the teaching processes and the complementary
mechanisms of communication and control, which

underpin effective and equable learning opportunities in
the design and technology classrooms and workshops.
IBD 422 Contemporary issues in teaching Design and
Technology (3 credits)
The course aims at providing awareness, specific and indepth knowledge about contemporary issues in teaching
and learning of design and technology in Schools as
part of the National Curriculum. The course is directed
towards enabling students to acquire knowledge and
skills in the delivery of the Design and Technology in the
National Curriculum in order to teach it effectively.
IBD 512 D&T Curriculum Innovations (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with
grounding in the theory of curriculum design and
evaluation and its application in Design and Technology.
This should enable them to continuously revise and
update the Design and Technology curriculum in schools.
IBD 513 Motion Design (3 credits)
This course builds a foundation of the dynamic language
of motion graphic design in film, television and
interactive media. The course will build an understanding
of motion literacy, kinetic imagery and dynamic
typography alongside sequential aspects of composition
and choreography. This studio class will be processdriven, and it will expose students to different animation
processes and computer graphics.

DEPARTMENT OF
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Introduction
The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers the
following programmes:
•
•

Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical)
Combined Degree (Major in Mechanical 		
Engineering)
• Combined Degree (Minor in Mechanical 		
Engineering)
• Bachelor of Industrial Engineering
• MSc in Mechanical Engineering
Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical) Degree Subject to General Regulations
000 and 200 and the Faculty Special Regulations
210, the following Departmental Regulations for the
Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical) Degree (BEng)
shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical
Engineering) Degree Programme shall be as stipulated
in Faculty Special Regulations 21.10.
Programme Structure
The Programme for the Degree in Mechanical Engineering will be a Single Major that will extend over 10
semesters of full-time study. It shall contain one subject
called Mechanical Engineering consisting of courses
shown below. The curriculum for Levels 100 and 200
shall be as stipulated in Faculty Special Regulation
21.30.
Level 300
Mechanical Engineering
Semester 5
Core Courses
MAT391 Mathematics III (3, pre-requisite MAT291)
MMB331 Mechanics of Solids I (2, pre-req. CCB241)
MMB332 Materials in Engineering (3, pre-req.
CCB231)

MMB333
MMB314
EEB342

Dynamics of Rigid Bodies (2, pre-req.
MMB241)
Measurement and Instrumentation (2)
Computer Programming (3)

MMB544
MMB545
MMB546
MMB547
MMB514

Semester 6
Core Courses
MMB341 Mechanics of Solids II (2, pre-req. MMB331)
MMB323 Thermodynamics I (3)
MMB334 Fluid Mechanics I (3)
MMB342 Theory of Machines (3, pre-req. MMB333)
EEB344
Electrical Machines (3)
ITB340
Industrial Training I (4, 8 weeks, winter
session)

Level 400
Mechanical Engineering
Semester 7
Core Courses
MMB431 Machine Design I (4, pre-req. MMB341 and
MMB 342)
LAW253 Foundation of Engineering Law (3)
MMB432 Fluid Mechanics II (3, pre-req. MMB334)
MMB433 Advanced Thermodynamics (3, pre-req.
MMB323)
MMB434 Heat Transfer Processes (3, co-req. MMB433)
Semester 8
MMB441 Machine Design II (4, pre-req. MMB431)
IMB325
Manufacturing Processes (3, pre-req.
MMB332)
MMB413 Systems and Control Engineering I (3, prereq. MMB391)
MMB444 Engineering Economics (3)
ITB440
Industrial Attachment (4, 8 weeks, winter
session)
In addition, all students shall at least select One of the
following optional courses:
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts and
Principles (3, Elective )
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3,
Elective)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3, Elective)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3, Elective)
Level 500
Mechanical Engineering
Semester 9
Core Courses
MMB531 Mechanical Engineering Project I (6, pre-req.
MMB413, MMB431, MMB432, MMB434)
MMB532 Thermal & Fluid Systems Design (3, pre-req.
MMB434)
MMB533 Engineering and Project Management (3,
pre-req. MMB444)
CCB535 Environmental Management (3)
Semester 10
Core Courses
MMB541 Mechanical Engineering Project II (6, prereq. MMB531)
MMB542 Maintenance Engineering (3)
IMB523
Professional Ethics & Practice (3)
In addition, all students shall select two of the following
optional courses:
MMB543 Pneumatics and Hydraulics Systems (3,
Option)

99

Advanced Manufacturing Processes (3, prereq. IMB325, Option)
Industrial Tribology (3, Option)
Building Services Engineering (3, Option)
Mechatronics Engineering, (3, pre-req.
MMB413, Option)
Systems and Control Engineering II (3, prereq. MMB413, Option)

Assessment
Except for MMB231 (Engineering and Computer Aided
Drafting), MMB431 (Machine Design II), MMB531
(Project I), and MMB541 (Project II), all courses shall be
assessed as stipulated in the Faculty Special Regulations
21.40. For MMB431 the ratio of marks for continuous
assessment to examination shall be 1:1. For MMB231,
MMB531, and MMB541 the assessment mode shall be
by continuous assessment only.
Departmental Regulations for the Bachelor of
Engineering (General) Degree
Subject to the General Regulations 000 and 200 and
the Faculty Special Regulations 210, the following
Departmental Regulations for the BEng. Degree (Major
in Mechanical Engineering) shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Bachelor of Engineering Degree (Major
in Mechanical Engineering) shall be as stipulated in
Faculty Special Regulations 21.20.
Programme Structure
The combined programme shall extend over 10 semesters of full time study. It shall consist of one major
subject (Mechanical Engineering) and one minor subject
selected outside the major subject. The curriculum for
Level 100 and 200 shall be stipulated in the Faculty
Special Regulations 21.30. At Levels 300, 400 and 500
students shall be required to follow a selected minor
subject outside the major subject. The courses from the
minor subject shall have a minimum credit value of 23.
Subject to regulation 31.22, students must achieve a
minimum of 53 credits from the major subject courses
listed in 31.27, 31.28 and 31.29. In cases where a similar
course appears in both the minor and the major subject,
there shall be no double crediting of the course. Students shall be required to undertake industrial training
as per Faculty of Engineering and Technology Special
regulations 21.33.
Level 300
Major in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 5
Core Course
MAT391 Mathematics III (3, pre-req. MAT291)
Students to select and follow at least three of the
following courses:
MMB331 Mechanics of Solids I (2, pre-req. CCB241)
MMB332 Materials in Engineering (3, pre-req.
CCB231)
MMB333 Dynamics of Rigid Bodies (2, pre-req.
MMB241)
MMB314 Measurement and Instrumentation (2)
EEB342
Computer Programming (3)
Semester 6
Students to select and follow at least three of the
following courses:
MMB341 Mechanics of Solids II, (2, pre-req. MMB331)
MMB323 Thermodynamics I (3)
MMB334 Fluid Mechanics I (3)
MMB342 Theory of Machines (3, pre-req. MMB333)

EEB344

Electrical Machines I (3)

Level 400
Major in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 7
Students to select and follow at least three of the
following courses:
MMB431 Machine Design I (4, pre-req. MMB333)
LAW253 Foundation of Engineering Law (3)
MMB432 Fluid Mechanics II (3, pre-req. MMB334)
MMB433 Advanced Thermodynamics, (3, pre-req.
MMB323)
MMB434 Heat Transfer Processes (3, co-req. MMB433)
Semester 8
Students to select and follow at least three of the
following courses:
MMB441 Machine Design II (4, pre-req. MMB431)
IMB325
Manufacturing Processes (3, pre-req.
MMB332)
MMB413 Systems and Control Engineering I (3)
MMB444 Engineering Economics (3)
In addition, all students shall select at least one of the
following optional courses:
POL305
Politics of Southern Africa (3, Elective)
PAD202 Public Administration in Botswana (3,
Elective)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3, Elective
POL306
International Political Economy (3, Elective
IMB523
Technological Entrepreneurship (3, Elective)
Level 500
Major in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 9
Core Course
MMB531 Mechanical Engineering Project I (6 Pre-req.
MMB434, MMB431, MMB442, MMB413)
In addition, all students shall select at least two of the
following options:
MMB532 Thermal & Fluid Systems Design (3, pre-req.
MMB442)
MMB533 Engineering and Project Management (3,
pre-req. MMB444)
CCB535 Environmental Management (3)
Semester 10
Core Course
MMB541 Mechanical Engineering Project II (6, prereq. MMB531)
In addition, students shall select at least one of the
following courses:
MMB514 Systems and Control Engineering II (3, prereq. MMB413)
IMB523
Professional Ethics & Practice (3)
MMB543 Pneumatics and Hydraulics Systems (3)
MMB544 Advanced Manufacturing Processes (3, prereq. IMB325)
MMB545 Industrial Tribology (3)
MMB546 Building Services (3)
MMB547 Mechatronics Engineering (3, pre-req.
MMB441)
Assessment
Except for MMB231 (Engineering and Computer Aided
Drafting), MMB431 (Machine Design II), MMB531
(Project I), and MMB541 (Project II), all courses shall be
assessed as stipulated in the Faculty Special Regulations
21.40. For MMB431 the ratio of marks for continuous

assessment to examination shall be 1:1. For MMB231,
MMB531, and MMB541 the assessment mode shall be
by continuous assessment only.
Departmental Regulations for the Combined Degree
Programme

LAW253
MMB432
MMB433

Subject to the General Regulations 000 and 200 and
the Faculty Special Regulations 210, the following
Departmental Regulations for the Minor in Mechanical
Engineering shall apply:

Semester 8
Students shall attain a minimum of six credits from any
of the following optional courses:
MMB441 Machine Design II (4, pre-req. MMB431)
IMB325
Manufacturing Processes (3, pre-req.
MMB332)
MMB413 Systems and Control Engineering I (3)
MMB444 Engineering Economics (3)

Entrance Requirements
Successful registration into a combined major degree
programme in Science, Engineering or Technology.
Courses in Mathematics must be covered in the major
subject with at least 2 such courses in Level 200.
Programme Structure
The minor programme shall extend over 8 semester full
time study and shall be part of a combined major in
another subject. It shall consist of one subject Mechanical Engineering with courses listed in 33.25, 33.26 and
33.27. The curriculum for level 100 shall be stipulated
in Faculty Special Regulation 21.30. In cases where a
similar course appears in both the minor and the major
subject, there shall be no double crediting of the course.
Students should achieve a minimum of 23 credits in the
minor subject of Mechanical Engineering.
Level 200
Minor in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 3
Core Course
CCB232 Engineering Mechanics: Statics (3)
MMB231 Engineering and Computer Aided Drafting
(3)
Semester 4
Core Course
CCB231
Material Science for Engineers (3)
MMB241 Dynamics of Particles (3, pre-req. MAT291)
Level 300
Minor in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 5
Students shall attain a minimum of four credits from any
of the following courses:
MMB331 Mechanics of Solids I (2, pre-req. CCB241)
MMB332 Materials in Engineering (3, pre-req.
CCB231)
MMB333 Dynamics of Rigid Bodies (2, pre-req. MMB
241)
MMB314 Measurement and Instrumentation (2)
EEB342
Computer Programming (3)
Semester 6
Students shall attain a minimum of four credits from any
of the following courses:
MMB341 Mechanics of Solids II (2, pre-req. MMB331)
MMB323 Thermodynamics I (3)
MMB334 Fluid Mechanics I (3)
MMB342 Theory of Machines (3, pre-req. MMB333)
EEB344
Electrical Machines I (3)

Level 400
Minor in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 7
Students shall attain a minimum of six credits from any
of the following optional courses:
MMB431 Machine Design I (4, pre-req. MMB 341 and
MMB342)

100

MMB434

Foundation of Engineering Law (3)
Fluid Mechanics II (3, pre-req. MMB334)
Advanced Thermodynamics (3, pre-req.
MMB323)
Heat Transfer Processes (3, co-req. MMB433)

Assessment
Except for MMB231 Engineering and Computer Aided
Drafting), MMB431 Machine Design II), all courses
shall be assessed as stipulated in the Faculty Special
Regulations 21.40. For MMB431 the ratio of marks for
continuous assessment to examination shall be 1:1. For
MMB231 the assessment mode shall be by continuous
assessment only.
Level 300
Minor in Mechanical Engineering
Semester 5
Students shall attain a minimum of four credits from any
of the following core courses:
MMB311 Solid Mechanics (3, pre-req.CCB221)
MMB312 Materials (2, pre-req. CCB211)
MMB313 Mechanics of Machines (3,pre-req.
MMB222)
MMB314 Measurement and Instrumentation (2)
Semester 6
Students shall attain a minimum of four credits from any
of the following optional courses:
MMB322
MMB323
MMB324
MMB325

Machine Component Design (2, pre-req.
MMB311, MMB313)
Thermodynamics I (3)
Fluid Mechanics (3)
Manufacturing (2, pre-req. MMB312)

Level 400
Minor in Mechanical Engineering Semester 7
Students shall attain a minimum of six credits from any
of the following optional courses:
MMB411 Machine and Industrial Design (2, pre-req.
MMB322)
MMB421 Heat Transfer (2, pre-req. MMB323,
MMB324)
MMB413 Systems and Control Engineering I (3)
MMB414 Engineering Management (3) MMB416
Mechatronics (2, pre-req. MMB314,
co-req. MMB413)
MMB417

Thermodynamics II (2, pre-req. MMB323)

MMB418

Pneumatics and Hydraulics (2)

MMB410

Advanced Manufacturing (2)

Assessment
Except for MMB211 (Engineering Drawing) and MMB411
(Machine and Industrial Design) all courses shall be
assessed as stipulated in the Faculty Special Regulations
21.30. For MMB411 the ratio of marks for continuous
assessment to examination shall be 1:1. For MMB211

the assessment mode shall be by continuous assessment
only.
Departmental Special Regulations for the Bachelor of
Engineering (Industrial Engineering)
General provisions
Subject to the provisions of the General Regulations
000, and 200, the following Departmental Special
Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
Admission into Level 100 of the Programme shall be
governed by General Regulation 20.2.
Admission into Level 200 of the Degree programme
shall be satisfactorily completion of Level 100 of Bachelor of Science with at least the equivalent of C grades in
Mathematics, Chemistry, and Physics. OR
Applicants in possession of an appropriate A-Level
qualification with at least C grades in Mathematics
and any one of Physics or Chemistry may be admitted
directly into Level 200 of the Degree Programme. OR
Applicants in possession of an appropriate Diploma in
Mechanical Engineering may be admitted directly into
Level 200 of the Degree Programme.
OR
Applicants in possession of an appropriate Higher
Diploma in Mechanical Engineering may be admitted
directly into Level 300 of the Degree Programme.
Bachelor of Industrial Engineering
Degree Structure
The Programme shall consist of a single major subject
called Industrial Engineering.
Level 100 courses shall be as specified in the: Faculty of
Science Special Regulations for the Bachelor of Science
Degree.
Level 200 Semester 3 courses shall be as specified in
the Faculty Special Regulations for the Bachelor of
Engineering Degree.
Level 200
Semester 4
Core Courses
DTB221
Workshop technology II
CCB221
Strength of Materials (2 credits, core, preCCB212)
MMB221 Manual and Computer Aided Drafting (2,
pre-req. MMB211)
MMB222 Dynamics (2)
EEB221
A.C. Circuits Principles (2)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (2)
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics (3, pre-req. 291)
Winter Session (8 weeks)
ITB200
Industrial Training I (4)

Level 300 Semester 6
Core Courses
IMB321
Information System Design (3)
IMB325
Manufacturing Processes (3, pre-req.
MMB312)
IMB411
Industrial Logistics (3)
IMB425
Operations Research I(3)
MKT100 Principle of Marketing (3)
		
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
IMB413
Simulation Modelling (3)
IMB515
Operations Research II (3, pre-req. 		
IMB425)
MMB513 Manufacturing Systems (3,pre-req. 		
IMB325)
ACC201
Introduction to cost accounting(3, pre- req.
ACC100)
EEB315
Computer Programming (3)
Level 400
Semester 8
Core Courses
IMB322
Technological Entrepreneurship
(3)
IMB324
Productivity and Technology
Management(3)
IMB423
Process Planning and cost Estimation
(3, pre-req. ECO313)
IMB424
Industrial Quality Control
(3,pre-req. MAT271)
IMB414
Organisational Ergonomics (3)
		Winter Session
ITB400
Industrial Training II (4)
				
Level 500
Semester 9
Core Courses
IMB511
Project I (6, pre-req. IMB413, IMB515,
MMB513, IMB423, IMB424, IMB324)
IMB415
Facilities planning and Value Engineering
(3, pre-req. MMB513)
		
In addition, all students shall select at least two of the
following optional courses:
Optional Courses:
IMB512
Project Management (3, pre-req.
IBM321)
IMB513
Industrial Relations (3)
IMB516
Industrial Analysis (3, pre-req. IMB321)
CCB315
Environmental Engineering (3)
Level 500
Semester 10
Core Courses
IMB521
Project II (6 pre-req. IMB511)
IMB523
Professional Ethics (3)
IMB525
Production and Operations Management (3,
pre-req. IMB425)
In addition, all students shall select at least one (1) of
the following optional courses:

Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
MAT271 Introduction to mathematical Statistics (3)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
MMB312 Materials (3, pre-req. CCB211)
ECO313
Engineering Economics (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)

Optional Courses:
IMB522
Computer Aided Manufacturing
(3, pre-req. MMB513)
IMB526
Production Planning and Control
(3, pre-req. IMB425)
ACC308 Cost and Management Accounting
(3, pre-req. ACC201)

101

Assessment
All courses shall be assessed as stipulated in the Faculty
Special Regulation 21.30.
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as
per General Regulations 00.9.
Award of the Degree
The Degree shall be awarded in accordance with the
provisions of General Regulation 00.85.
Classification of the degree shall be in accordance with
the provisions of General Regulation 20.4
COURSE LISTING
FOR ALL OTHER COURSES NOT OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT PLEASE CONSULT THE RELAVENT
DEPARTMENT FOR THE SYNOPSIS
MMB231 Engineering and Computer Aided Drawing
(3)
The course provides a basic introduction to manual and
computer aided (AutoCAD software) drafting with a focus on basic geometric construction, principles of tangency, orthographic and isometric projections, sectional
views, dimensioning, introduction to AutoCAD software,
methods of choosing commands and settings drawing
limits, basic Draw and Modify commands, dimensioning
commands and styles, Layers and Properties manager,
CAD design Centre, plotting AutoCAD drawings and
solid modelling basics.
MMB241 Dynamics of Particles (3)
Basic course for students of all engineering disciplines
to develop an understanding of the relationship between forces and motion for particles and rigid bodies.
Basic principles of mechanics are used to formulate the
equations of motion. Geometry, trigonometry, scalar
and vector algebra and calculus are used in solving the
equations.
MMB331 Solid Mechanics I (3)
This course provides an introduction to the engineering
applications of basic solid mechanics principles in machine components and structures. The course gives the
basis for application of mechanics theory in engineering
practice; it forms the foundation for the design of
engineering components and structures
MMB332 Materials in Engineering (3)
It involves an understanding of the basic properties of
materials; how these are controlled by processing; and
the chain reasoning that leads to a successful choice.
The course aims to provide the basic understanding of
materials selection for engineering applications.
MMB333 Dynamics of Rigid Bodies (2)
Mechanics of Machines is a fundamental course for
mechanical engineering students. Emphasis will be
focused on the study of motion (kinematics) and the
devices (mechanisms) designed and utilized to transfer
that motion and obtain a specific output.
MMB314 Measurement and Instrumentation (2)
The course provides students with a thorough understanding of the fundamental measurement & instrumentation topics. These include standards definition
and application, identification of good practice and
common errors, physical principles of typical transducers and technology used in process instrumentation and
other common engineering measurements.

MMB 341 Solid Mechanics II (2)
The aim of the course is to extend knowledge of
students in Solid Mechanics; especially in the plastic
deformation. It also includes familiarizing them with
the fundamentals, intricacies and application of the
theory of finite element analysis and application of
MatLab in Finite element analysis.
MMB323 Thermodynamics I (3)
The course provides an introduction to heat energy. The
course provides an understanding of the interrelations
between different forms of energy. The course provides
the concepts of first and second law of thermodynamics, thermodynamic properties, ideal gas, control
volume energy analysis, Carnot cycle, entropy, idealized
processes, equations of state, mixtures and exergy and
exergetic analysis.
MMB324 Fluid Mechanics I (3)
Fluid mechanics is a science that describes the mechanics and dynamics of fluids (liquids and gases) and
is based on the conservation laws of mass, momentum
and energy. These three laws are continuously cast in
the most applicable and simplest form to describe the
problem at hand. The emphasis is on the physical basis
of the phenomena rather than on details of engineering practice; specialized mathematical techniques
are avoided and algebraic manipulation is kept to a
minimum.
MMB342 Theory of Mechanics (3)
Mechanics of Machines is a fundamental course for
mechanical engineering students. Emphasis will be
focused on the study of motion and the devices utilized
to transfer that motion and on theoretical background
in vibration and basic information on noise.
MMB431 Machine Design I (4)
Engineering Design is a fundamental course for mechanical engineering students. In this course emphasis
will be focused on the study of static and variable
stresses in machine components as well as designing
for static and fatigue strength and for impact loads.
Students will also learn the design procedures of flexible
mechanical elements, permanent and non-permanent
joints, shaft and associated parts and helical springs.
Throughout the course the Factor of Safety approach
will be incorporated as an important means in designing
machine components.
MMB432 Fluid Mechanics II (3)
Knowledge of fluid flow & related machinery is essential
in all fields of engineering. Hydraulic machines have
important role in power generation, water supply and
irrigation and also in most of engineering segments.
These machines are also important components of a
large number of products used in daily life (pumps in
refrigerators, fans in computers/-cars, transportation
of fluids like water, oil, etc.). Fluid machines also are to
a very large extent used in the propulsion of transport
vehicles (jet engines and propellers for airplanes, turbochargers for cars, gas turbines for fast ferries).
MMB433: Advanced Thermodynamics (3)
Analysis of vapour power cycles: Rankine, Reheat and
regenerative cycles; Gas power cycles: Brayton, Otto,
Diesel, Dual cycles; combined gas-vapour cycles; IC
engines, Mixtures of ideal gases; Psychometrics; Fundamentals of chemical thermodynamics. Air Compressors.
Refrigeration and Heat Pump cycles.

MMB 434: Heat Transfer Processes (3)
The course provides students with a thorough understanding of the fundamental Heat Transfer topics: also
to apply the laws of heat transfer together with the
correct procedure to design and analyse engineering
problems concerned with heat transfer.

MMB 544 Advanced Manufacturing Processes(3)
The course provides an introduction to advanced
manufacturing with a focus on principles of computer
aided manufacturing concepts related to automated
manufacturing and robotics.

MMB441Machine Design II (4)
The course focuses on the selection of Rolling Contact
bearings and Journal bearing design analysis as well as
Power transmitting elements such as Spur, Helical, Bevel
and Worm &Worm gears, as well as Friction Brakes &
Clutches.

MMB545 Industrial Tribology (3)
This is a comprehensive introduction to Tribology - science of lubrication, friction and wear, with
an emphasis on the design and performance of liquid-lubricated machine elements.

MMB413 Systems and Control Engineering (3)
The course provides students with a thorough understanding of the fundamental control systems topics:
also to design and analysis of simple, single axis control
systems to stabilise electromechanical systems together
with the correct procedure involved in solving problems
concerned with systems and control engineering.

MMB546 Building Services Engineering (3)
The course provides an in-depth knowledge of designs
of different building services systems as would a mechanical consultant do. With bias to design of heating
ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), the course
will cover other systems as energy management, fire
detection and protection systems.

MMB444 Engineering Economics (3)
The course provides an introduction to engineering economics concepts to engineering students with a focus
on teaching engineering students how to make smart
financial decisions in an effort to create economical
products

MMB 547 Mechatronics Engineering (3)
An introduction to mechatronic systems, including uses
and simple design. Simple microprocessor programming
Mechanical aspects of mechatronic systems.

MMB531 Mechanical Engineering Project I (6)
The aim of this course is to provide students with
practical experience in some aspects of mechanical
engineering e.g. design activities, project management,
cost, etc. Students, working in groups, write a literature
survey of an assigned project, critically analyse its
components, and develop a bill of materials necessary
for the supply and completion of the project. The course
allows students to integrate acquired knowledge to
develop a product being assigned, conduct researched,
collect data etc.
MMB532 Thermal and Fluid System Design (3)
Introduction to Design Process, Thermal and Fluid
Components, Thermal and Fluid Aspects of design,
Thermal (Exergetic) Analysis of System and Components,
heat Transfer equipment, Piping and pumps, Costing
and Economic Analysis, Thermo economic evaluation,
optimization, Discussions and Presentation of projects
Industrial: Visits
MMB533 Engineering and Project Management (3)
The course provides an introduction to Engineering
and Project Management with a focus on principles
of engineering management, engineering economic
concepts related to management and types of project
management techniques. Ethics in project management
and case studies.
MMB541 Mechanical Engineering Project II (6)
This is the continuation of the course MMB531
MMB542 Maintenance Engineering (3)
The course provides an understanding of current practice relating to the design, layout, operation, control,
installation and maintenance strategies applied to
engineering plants/equipment’s.
MMB543 Pneumatics & Hydraulics (3)
Pneumatics and hydraulics (Fluid power) is the practice
of using fluid power to transfer energy. Various components are used during the transfer of energy in order
to control the process, protect the system and measure
various flow quantities.

102

MMB514 Systems and Control Engineering II (3)
The course provides students with a thorough understanding of the fundamental control systems topics:
also to design and analysis of simple, single axis control
systems to stabilise electromechanical systems together
with the correct procedure involved in solving problems
concerned with systems and control engineering.
Bachelor of Industrial Engineering
IMB 321Information System Design (3)
System requirement analysis, data flow 		
charts, database design and normalization, 		
software design.
IMB 322 Technological Entrepreneurship (3)
Basic concepts of Entrepreneurship, Organizations,
Funding, and Legal aspects in Entrepreneurship.
IMB 324 Productivity and Technology Management (3)
Productivity engineering, Measurement of productivity,
productivity evaluation, technology management and
technology transfer.
IMB 411 Industrial Logistics (3)
Importance of Logistics management, customer service,
Forecasting logistics information systems, inventory
management, strategic purchasing, packaging, transportation, warehousing, Supply chain management
IMB 411 Industrial Logistics (3)
Importance of Logistics management, customer service,Forecasting logistics information systems, inventory
management, strategic purchasing, packaging, transportation, warehousing, Supply chain management.
IMB413 Simulation Modelling (3)
Introduction to simulation technique, methodology,
problem formulation, discrete simulation models,
simulation software.
IMB 414 Organizational Ergonomics (3)
Productivity engineering, human factors in work-study,
method study, work measurements, Incentive system,
and Ergonomics.

IMB 415 Facilities Planning and Value Engineering (3)
Facilities planning, plant layout, computerized layout,
material handling, value engineering, value analysis, and
reporting.
IMB 423 Process Planning and Cost Estimation (3)
Process planning, estimation and costing, product cost
estimation, Element of cost, estimation of machining
time, Welding cost estimation, forging cost estimation,
Foundry cost estimation.
IMB 424 Industrial Quality Control (3)
Process control, control charts for variables
and
attributes, product inspection, OC curve, and sampling
methods
IMB 425 Operations Research – I (3)
Operations Research, Linear Optimization Models, The
transportation model, and Assignment problem
IMB 512: Project Management (3)
Introduction, project planning, project scheduling, time
and cost considerations, controlling projects and limited
resource scheduling.
IMB 513: Industrial Relations (3)
Productivity; Methods Engineering; SHERQ; Linear
optimisation procedures.
IMB 515 Operations Research – II (3)
Dynamic programming, waiting line models, simulation,
and Computer aided simulation models.
IMB 516 Industrial analysis (3)
Data analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, decision analysis,
reliability engineering
IMB522 Computer aided Manufacturing (3)
CAD/CAM interface, group technology, process planning
techniques, constructional features, CNC programming,
product modeling
IMB523 Professional Ethics (3)
Engineering ethics, Engineering as social experimentation, Engineer’s responsibility for safety, Responsibilities
and rights
IMB525 Production and Operations Management (3)
Forecasting, production planning, material management, plant location, plant layout, maintenance,
personal administration, and work-study.
IMB526 Production Planning and Control (3)
Production planning systems, forecasting, sales and
Operations planning, master production scheduling,
aggregate planning, material requirements planning,
capacity and inventory planning and production activity
control, Just-in-time, optimized production.

103

FACULTY OF HEALTH SCIENCES

DEAN
Prof. I. Kasvosve
)Bsc, Msc (Zimbabwe
)Phd (University of Ghent

DEPUTY DEAN
Prof. M. Magowe
,PhD Nursing, MSc Midwifery
.BEd (Nursing) RN, RM

FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR
)ACADEMIC(
H. Tlhabano
)DARM (U.B), BA (UB), MPA (HRM) (UB

)MOL Monash University (Melbourne
SCHOOL OF ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS
SCHOOL OF NURSING

MANAGER, HUMAN RESOURCES

SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH

J. J. Tsimako

SCHOOL OF PHARMACY

)MlMEd (Australia), BA, PGDE (UB

104

The Faculty of Health Sciences is dedicated to
training robust health practitioners and researchers
who are market ready for Botswana, the region and
the world. The Faculty is currently offering several
professional degrees in Nursing, Medical Laboratory
Science, Cytotechnology and Histotechnology
Science, Environmental Health and Pharmacy. In
addition, the Faculty offers a number of Master of
Nursing Science in a number of specialisations, plus
Master of Philosophy and PhD in Medical science
degrees.
The goals of the Faculty are:
a. To produce high quality graduates who are adequately prepared to practice in 		
the Botswana and African context, but adaptable to
practice globally.
b. To undertake impactful research in relevant and
high-priority areas of the nation and research
training in the health sciences that will contribute to
improved national and regional human health and
wellness.
c. To engage with key stakeholders to strengthen the
capacity of Botswana for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health
risks.
d. To promote intra-faculty teaching and learning and
articulate with programme offerings in the SADC
region and beyond.
e. To prepare graduates for lifelong learning to
enhance professional practice.
f. To respond to the demands of stakeholders for new
skills to improve health care delivery in the country.
Academic Organisational Structure
Organisationally, the Faculty of Health Sciences operates under schools and currently is comprised of the
following entities:
- School of Allied Health Professions
- School of Nursing
- School of Public Health
- School of Pharmacy

SCHOOL OF ALLIED HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
Head: Dr Margaret Mokomane, PhD (University
of Botswana), MSc (Hons) (Griffith University,
Brisbane, Australia), BSc (Howard University,
Washington, DC, USA)

The School offers the following programmes leading to
the award of the mentioned degrees:
1. BSc Medical Laboratory Sciences (BSc MLS)
Programme
The programme is designed to develop knowledge,
technical skills and professional attributes to perform
testing in clinical, public health, forensic and veterinary
laboratories.
1.1 Entrance Requirements
a) There is no direct entry into the Bachelor of Science
(Medical Laboratory Sciences) degree programme for
school leavers with Botswana General Certificate of
Secondary Education (BGCSE) or its equivalent. Such
candidates shall enrol into Level 100 of science courses
at the first instance, and upon successful completion of

the science courses apply to transfer to the Bachelor of
Science (Medical Laboratory Sciences) programme.
b)
Applicants will be required to have attained the
following or their equivalent, in addition to prescribed
GEC courses: completed Bachelor of Science Year 1 and
have passed BIO111 Principles of Biology,; BIO112 Diversity of Plants and Animals; CHE101 General Chemistry
I; CHE102 General Chemistry II; MAT111 Introductory
Mathematics I; MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II;
PHY112 Geometrical Optics and Mechanics, Vibrations
and Waves; and PHY122 Electricity and Magnetism, may
apply to transfer to the Bachelor of Science (Medical
Laboratory Science) degree programme.
c) An applicant who holds Advanced Level passes in
Mathematics, Chemistry and Biology/Physics with a
grade C or better will be admitted into Level 200 but will
be required to take GEC courses COM101 and COM102.
d) An applicant who holds a Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology obtained from the Institute of Health
Sciences or Its equivalent plus two years relevant experience and registered with Botswana Health Professions Council as a medical laboratory technician will
be exempted from Level 100 and 300 courses. However,
they will be required to take GEC courses COM101 and
COM102.
e) An applicant who holds a BSc degree in biological
science/biochemistry or equivalent will be admitted into
Level 200 and may be exempted from equivalent courses
prescribed in the degree programme, subject to the recommendation of the Department.
1.2 Programme Structure
Semester 1
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics (4)
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics, Mechanics, Vibrations
and Waves (4)
COM101 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Plants and Animals (4)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4)		
[Prerequisites MAT111]
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4)			
[Prerequisites CHE101]
PHY122 Electricity and Magnetism (4) 		
[Prerequisites PHY112]
COM102 Health Communication (Health Sciences
and Pre-Med) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
[Prerequisites ICT121]
Semester 3
FHS200
Health Informatics (3)
BIO211
Cell Biology (3)
BIO212
Genetics (3)
FHS201
Anatomy and Physiology I
MLS201 Clinical Laboratory Instrumentation (3)
Semester 4
FHS202
Human Physiologies (3)
MLS202 Laboratory Quality Management Systems (3)
MLS203 Medical Virology (3)
MLS204 Introduction to Immunology and Serology
(3)
MLS205 Medical Parasitology (3)

105

Semester 5
MLS206 Medical Bacteriology I (3)
MLS207 Haematology I (3)
MLS208 Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion
Techniques (3) [Prerequisites MLS204]
MLS209 Clinical Chemistry I (3)
MLS210
Principles of Molecular Diagnostics (3)
[Prerequisites BIO212, MLS203]
Semester 6, Winter Semester and Semester 7
MLS301 Bacteriology, Serology and Parasitology
Practicum (10) [Prerequisites MLS205,
MLS206]
MLS302 Virology and Flow Cytometry Practicum (6)
[Prerequisites MLS203, MLS204, MLS210
MLS303 Haematology and Blood Bank Practicum
(10) [Prerequisites MLS204, MLS207,
MLS208]
MLS304 Blood Transfusion Practice Practicum (4)
[Prerequisites MLS204, MLS208]
MLS305 Clinical Chemistry Practicum (10)		
[Prerequisites MLS201, MLS209]
		
Semester 8
MLS401 Medical Bacteriology II (3) [Prerequisites
MLS206, MLS301]
MLS402 Haematology II (3) [Prerequisites MLS208,
MLS303]
MLS403 Clinical Chemistry II (3) [Prerequisites
MLS209, MLS305]
MLS404 Introduction to Biostatistics (3)
MLS405 Research Methods and Proposal Writing (3)
Semester 9
MLS406 Clinical Immunology (3) [Prerequisites
MLS204]
MLS407 Laboratory Management and Education (3)
MLS408 Special Microbiology and Medical Mycology
(3) [Prerequisites MLS206, MLS401]
MLS409 Research Project (3) [Prerequisites MLS404,
MLS405]
Optional Course (3)
Optional Course Menu
ENH222 Epidemiology
LAW441 Law and Health Care (3)
ELC451 Resource Management in Africa (3)
ECO474 Health Economics (3)
3. Assessment
3.1. Continuous Assessment shall be according to
General Academic Regulations 00.81 shall be based on
tests and/or assignments, and where applicable, clinical
laboratory practice.
3.2. Final Examinations shall be conducted according to
General Academic Regulations 00.82.
3.3. The ratio of Continuous Assessment to Final Examination shall be 1:1 or as specified in the course.
4. Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as
specified in General Academic Regulation 00.9.
5. Award of Degree
To be awarded a degree, a student must satisfy the relevant General Academic Regulations 00.851 and 00.852.
The Degree shall be classified in accordance with the
provisions of General Academic Regulations 20.4,
with the cumulative GPA of 2.0 or above calculated in
accordance with General Academic Regulation 00.86.

2. BSc Cytotechnology and Histotechnology Sciences
(BSc CHS) Programme
The BSc CHS programme is designed to develop
competencies to:
a) Evaluate Pap smears and other non-gynaecologic
specimens for the presence of abnormal cells, and
b) Process and screen biopsy samples for diagnostic
purposes.
2.1 Entrance Requirements
a) There is no direct entry into the Bachelor of Science
(Medical Laboratory Sciences) degree programme for
school leavers with Botswana General Certificate of
Secondary Education (BGCSE) or its equivalent. Such
candidates shall enrol into Level 100 of science courses
at the first instance, and upon successful completion
of the science courses apply to transfer to the Bachelor
of Science (Medical Laboratory Sciences) programme.
b) Applicants will be required to have attained the following or their equivalent, in addition to prescribed
GEC courses: completed Bachelor of Science Year 1
and have passed BIO111 Principles of Biology,; BIO112
Diversity of Plants and Animals; CHE101 General
Chemistry I; CHE102 General Chemistry II; MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I; MAT122 Introductory
Mathematics II; PHY112 Geometrical Optics and Mechanics, Vibrations and Waves; and PHY122 Electricity
and Magnetism, may apply to transfer to the Bachelor
of Science (Medical Laboratory Science) degree programme.
c) An applicant who holds Advanced Level passes in
Mathematics, Chemistry and Biology/Physics with a
grade C or better will be admitted into Level 200 but
will be required to take GEC courses COM101 and
COM102.
d) An applicant who holds a Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology obtained from the Institute of Health
Sciences or Its equivalent plus two years relevant experience and registered with Botswana Health Professions Council as a medical laboratory technician will be
exempted from Level 100 and 300 courses. However,
they will be required to take GEC courses COM101 and
COM102.
e) An applicant who holds a BSc degree in biological
science/biochemistry or equivalent will be admitted
into Level 200 and may be exempted from equivalent
courses prescribed in the degree programme, subject to
the recommendation of the Department.
2.2 Programme Structure
Semester 1
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics (4)
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics, Mechanics, Vibrations
and Waves (4)
COM101 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Plants and Animals (4)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4)
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4)
PHY122 Electricity and Magnetism (4) [Prerequisites
PHY112]
COM102 Health Communication (Health Sciences
and Pre-Med) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)

Semester 3
FHS200
Health Informatics (3)
BIO211
Cell Biology (3)
BIO212
Genetics (3)
FHS201
Anatomy and Physiology (3)
CHS201
Introduction to Cytology and
Histotechnology (3)

General Academic Regulations 00.81 shall be based
on tests and/or assignments, and where applicable,
clinical laboratory practice.
3.2. Final Examinations shall be conducted according to
General Academic Regulations 00.82.
3.3. The ratio of Continuous Assessment to Final
Examination shall be 1:1 or as specified in the course.

Semester 4
FHS202
Human Physiology (3)
MLS202 Laboratory Quality Management Systems (3)
CHS202 Introduction to Medical Laboratory
Sciences (4)
CHS203 Histotechnology Techniques (3) 		
[Prerequisites CHS201]
CHS204 Histotechnology Techniques Practical (3)

4. Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as
specified in General Academic Regulation 00.9.

Semester 5
CHS301
Biology of Disease (4)
CHS302 Special Histotechnology Procedures (3)
[Prerequisites CHS203, CHS204]
CHS303 Special Histotechnology Procedures
Practical (3)
CHS304 Normal Gynaecology Cytology (3)
CHS305 Normal Gynaecology Cytology Practical (3)
Semester 6
CHS306 Abnormal Gynaecology Cytology (3)
[Prerequisites CHS304, CHS305).
CHS307
Abnormal Gynaecology Cytology
Practical (3)
CHS308 Non-Gynaecology Cytology (3)
CHS309 Non-Gynaecology Cytology Practical (3)
CHS310
Molecular Diagnostics in Cytology and
Histology (3) [Prerequisites BIO211]
Winter Semester and Semester 7
CHS401
Histotechnology Clinical Practicum (8)
[Prerequisites CHS302, CHS303]
CHS402 Cytology Clinical Practicum (16) 		
[Prerequisites CHS306, CHS307, CHS308,
CHS309]
Semester 8
MLS404 Introduction to Biostatistics (3)
MLS405 Research Methods and Proposal Writing (3)
CHS403 Body Fluid Cytology (4) [Prerequisites
MLS209, MLS305]
CHS404 Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology (4)

5. Award of Degree
To be awarded a degree, a student must satisfy the relevant General Academic Regulations 00.851 and 00.852.
The Degree shall be classified in accordance with the
provisions of General Academic Regulations 20.4,
with the cumulative GPA of 2.0 or above calculated in
accordance with General Academic Regulation 00.86.
106

SCHOOL OF PHARMACY

Head: Prof. P. C. Adiukwu, PhD. (Uganda) MSc, B. Pharm
(Nigeria), MPSN (Nigeria)
Bachelor of Pharmacy (B. Pharm) Programme
The programme is designed to develop knowledge, technical skills and professional attributes to manufacture,
test, procure, distribute, dispense and provide pharmaceutical care services. The graduates may be deployed at
clinics, hospitals, community pharmacies, teaching and
research institution, quality control laboratories, manufacturing plants and wholesale,
3.1 Entrance Requirements
a) There is no direct entry into the B Pharm degree programme for School leavers with Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE).
b) Applicants who have completed BSc Year 1 and
have passed BIO111 Principles of Biology; BIO112 Diversity of Plants and Animals; CHE101 General Chemistry
I; CHE102 General Chemistry II; MAT111 Introductory
Mathematics I; MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II;
PHY112 Geometrical Optics and Mechanics; PHY122
Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of Modern Physics
may apply to transfer to the B Pharm degree programme.

Winter Semester
CHS405 Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology Practicum
(4) [Prerequisites CHS403, CHS404]

c) Applicants who hold Advanced Level passes in (i)
Chemistry with B or better, (ii) Mathematics, (iii) Biology
and (iv) Physics with grade C or better will be admitted
into Level 200, but will be required to take GEC courses
COM101 and COM102 if not already done.

Semester 9
MLS407 Laboratory Management and Education (3)
MLS409 Research Project (3)			
[Prerequisites MLS204]
CHS406 Slide Screening, Case Studies and Seminars
in Cytology (3) [Prerequisites CHS402,
CHS405]
Optional Course (3)
Elective Course (3)

d) Applicants possessing a Diploma must satisfy General
Academic Regulations 20.24. Applicants who hold a Diploma in Pharmacy Technician obtained from Institute
of Health Sciences or its equivalent shall be admitted
into Level 200, but will be required to take GEC courses
COM101 and COM102 if not already done. These candidates will not be exempted from practicums.

Optional Course Menu
ENH222 Epidemiology
LAW441 Law and Health Care (3)
ELC451
Resource Management in Africa (3)
ECO474
Health Economics (3)
Elective Course
One course at Level 400 outside medical laboratory
sciences
3. Assessment
3.1. Continuous Assessment shall be according to

106

e) Holders of a degree in Pharmaceutical Science will
be considered for advanced placement on-a-case-bycase basis with the decision guided by other pharmacy
courses already completed, the duration and the area of
pharmacy practice since graduation. However, Pharmacy
Practice and Pharmacotherapeutics courses will be mandatory.
f) An applicant with a BSc degree in chemistry/biological science or equivalent he/she may be exempted from
equivalent courses prescribed in the degree programme,
subject to the recommendations of the School.

g) Applicants may be interviewed and personal and professional behaviours will be considered in the process.
3.2 Programme Structure
Students should have completed and passed the
following courses;
Semester 1
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics (4)
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
COM101 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2)
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Plants and Animals (4) 		
[Prerequisites BIO111]
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4)		
[Prerequisites MAT111]
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4)			
[Prerequisites CHE101]
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
Modern Physics (4) [Prerequisites PHY111]
COM102 Health Communication (Health Sciences
and Pre-Med) (3)
ITC122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
[Prerequisites ICT121]
Students who have successfully completed the Pre-Professional Phase can apply to transfer to the Bachelor of
Pharmacy Programme.
Semester 3
CHE232 Structure and Survey of Functional Groups
(2) [Prerequisites CHE102]
CHE234 Organic Chemistry Lab I (1)		
[Prerequisites CHE102]
BIO211
Cell Biology (3)
BIO212
Genetics (3)
BIO231
Human Anatomy (3)
PHA211
Pharmaceutical Chemistry (3)
PHA212 Pharmacy Practice I (3)
Semester 4
BIO232
Human Physiology (3)
PHA221 Pharmaceutics and Dosage Forms I (3)
PHA222 Pharmacy Practice II (3)
PHA223 Pharmacognosy (3)
PHA224 Pharmaceutical Microbiology (3)		
[Prerequisites BIO211]
PHA225 Medicinal Chemistry I (3)		
[Prerequisites BIO211, PHA211
Semester 4, Winter Semester
PHA226 Practicum – Hospital and Clinics (3)
[Prerequisites PHA211, PHA224, PHA225]
PHA227 Practicum – Central Medical Stores and
National Quality Control Laboratory (3)
[Prerequisites PHA211, PHA223)
Semester 5
PHA311
Pharmaceutics and Dosage Forms II (3)
[Prerequisites PHA211]
PHA312 Pharmacy Practice III (3) 		
[Prerequisites PHA213, PHA223]
PHA313 Pharmaceutical Analysis (3) 		
[Prerequisites PHA211]
PHA314 Pathophysiology I (3) 			
[Prerequisites BIO211, BIO231 BIO232]
PHA215 Medicinal Chemistry I (3)		
[Prerequisites PHA225]
PHA216 Pharmacology I (3) [Prerequisites BIO231,
BIO232, PHA225]

Semester 6
PHA321 Pharmaceutics and Dosage Forms III (3)
[Prerequisites PHA311]
PHA322 Pharmacotherapeutics I (3) 		
[Prerequisites PHA311]
PHA323 Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics (3)
[Prerequisites PHA316]
PHA324 Pathophysiology II (3) [Prerequisites HA314]
PHA325 Pharmacy Law, Ethics and Regulatory Practice (3)
[Prerequisites PHA212, PHA222, PHA312]
PHA326 Pharmacology II (3) 			
[Prerequisites PHA315, PHA316

Optional Course Menu
ENH222 Epidemiology (3)
ENH223 Control of Communicable Diseases

Semester 6, Winter Semester
PHA327 Practicum – Managed Care Organization (3)
[Prerequisites PHA311, PHA324, PHA325,
PHA326]
PHA328 Practicum – Manufacturing Plant and
Wholesale (3) [Prerequisites PHA313,
PHA321, PHA323, PHA325]

4.3. The ratio of Continuous Assessment to Final
Examination shall be 1:1 or as specified in the course.

Semester 7
PHA411
Non-Prescription Medicines,
Complementary & Alternative Medicines (3)
[Prerequisites PHA212, PHA322, PHA324
PHA412 Pharmacotherapeutics II (3) 		
[Prerequisites PHA322, PHA323, PHA324]
PHA413 Clinical Pharmacokinetics (3) 		
[Prerequisites PHA321, PHA323, PHA326]
PHA414 Pharmacology III (3)			
[Prerequisites PHA316]
FHS200
Health Informatics (3)
		
Semester 8
PHA421 Pharmaceutical Technology and
Biotechnology (3) [Prerequisites PHA224,
PHA321]
PHA422 Pharmacotherapeutics III (3) 		
[Prerequisites PHA224, PHA412, PHA413,
PHA414]
MLS404 Introduction to Biostatistics (3)
MLS405 Research Methods and Proposal Writing (3)
Optional Course (3)
Optional Courses Menu
PHA423 Applied Pharmaceutical Analysis (3)
PHA424 Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry (3)
Semester 9
PHA511
Practicum – Hospital and Clinical
Pharmacy II (6) [Prerequisites PHA224,
PHA325, PHA412, PHA415, PHA421,
PHA422]
PHA512 Practicum – Community Pharmacy (3)
[Prerequisites PHA224, PHA325, PHA412,
PHA415, PHA421, PHA422]
PHA513 Practicum – Central Medical Stores and
National Quality Control Laboratory II
(3) [Prerequisites PHA224, PHA227,
PHA313, PHA321, PHA325]
PHA514 Practicum – Medicine Regulatory Authority
and BEDAP (3) [Prerequisites PHA313,
PHA321, PHA325]
Semester 10
PHA521 Medicine Information and Toxicology (3)
PHA522 Special Topics in Pharmacy
Pharmacovigilance, Veterinary medicines (3)
PHA523 Pharmacy Management, Leadership and
Entrepreneurship (3)
PHA524 Pharmacy Research Project (3)		
[Prerequisites MLS404, MLS405]
Optional Course (3)

107

4. Assessment
4.1. Continuous Assessment shall be according to
General Academic Regulations 00.81 shall be based on
tests and/or assignments, and where applicable, clinical
laboratory practice.
4.2. Final Examinations shall be conducted according
to General Academic Regulations 00.82.

5. Progression from Semester to Semester
To proceed from one semester to the next shall be
according to General Academic Regulation 00.9.
6. Award of Degree
To be awarded a degree, a student must satisfy the relevant General Academic Regulations 00.851 and 00.852.
The Degree shall be classified in accordance with the
provisions of General Academic Regulations 20.4,
with the cumulative GPA of 2.0 or above calculated in
accordance with General Academic Regulation 00.86.

SCHOOL OF NURSING

Head: Senior Lecturer K. S. Dithole, RN, RM, Bed (UB),
MSc, (Witwatersrand University) DLitt et Phil)
(University of South Africa)
The revised Bachelor of Nursing Science programme
consists of 4 to 8 semesters of full-time study leading
to a degree of Bachelor of Nursing Science. The program
has two streams: the generic stream consisting of 567
credits completed over 8 semesters. The completion
stream consists of 266 credits completed over 4 semesters plus one winter semester. The curriculum is composed of core, general education, optional, and elective
courses. Completion stream makes provision for credit
transfer and recognition of prior learning to accommodate and post-basic nursing diploma.
1. Special Regulations for the Bachelor of Nursing
Science Degree Programme
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and the Faculty of Health Sciences Special
Regulations, the following Departmental Special Regulations shall apply:
2. Entrance Requirements for the Bachelor of nursing
Science Programme:
Generic Stream
2.1 Admission to Level 100 of the Bachelor of Nursing
Science Generic stream shall be on the basis of performance in the Botswana General Certificate of Secondary
Education (BGCSE) examination, or its equivalent, in Science subjects. There shall be cut-off points, which shall
be determined by the Directorate of Academic Services.
2.2 Applicants who register for the Bachelor of Nursing
Science (Generic) stream shall be required:
a) To have taken at least 5 subjects, including English
Language and Mathematics, at the Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE) examination or at one sitting of its equivalent;
b) To have obtained a minimum grade of Pass in
English Language;

c) To have obtained a minimum grade of credit, or its
equivalent, in Mathematics.
2.3 In addition to the above basic requirements,
applicants must have a minimum grade of C, or its
equivalent, in at least 2 of the following subjects:
Physics, Chemistry and Biology; and a minimum grade
of B, or its equivalent, in Science. A double award or its
equivalent is required. The other qualifying subject must
be one of the following:
a) Development Studies
b) Literature in English
c) Design and Technology
d) Agriculture
e) Art
f) Food and Nutrition
g) Computer Studies
h) Fashion and Fabrics
i) Business Studies
j) Home Management
k) Any other subject deemed appropriate by the Faculty
of Health Sciences.
2.4 An applicant who has grade E or better at Advanced
(A)-level or equivalent qualifications in Science subjects,
may be awarded credits and exempted from equivalent
course(s) prescribed for a Degree Programme, subject to
the recommendation of the relevant Head of Department and approval of the Deputy Dean.
2.5 Programme Structure for the Bachelor of Nursing
Science: Generic Stream
Level 100: Semester 1
General Education Courses (GEC)
COM101
ICT121

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med) (3)
Computing Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)

Core Courses
PHY161
Physics for Nurses (3)
BIO231
Human Anatomy (3)
BNS111
Introduction to Nursing and Health I(3)
BNS113
Introduction to Nursing & Health Practice I
(4)
Level 100: Semester 2
GEC Courses
ICT122
Computing Skills Fundamentals II (2)
COM102 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med) (3)
Core Courses
BIO232
Human Physiology (3)
BNS112
Introduction to Nursing and Health II (3)
BNS114
Introduction to Nursing and Health Practice
II (4)
BIO 120 Introductory Biochemistry (3)
Level 200: Semester 3
Core Courses
BNS301 Pathophysiology (3)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
BNS215 Concepts in Health and Illness: Adult and
Aged Health Nursing (3)
BNS217 Concepts in Health and Illness: Adult and
Aged Health Nursing Practice (4)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics (4)

Level 200: Semester 4
Core Courses
BIO216:
General Microbiology (3)
BNS200 Pharmacology (3)
BNS300 Health Assessment (3)
BNS214 Infant and Child Nursing (3)
BNS216 Infant and Child Nursing Practice (4)
Optional Courses (3)
The student is expected to SELECT ONE course from the
list of courses on table
ALL152
Style in writing (3)
BSW202 Social Policy (3)
EFP201
Counselling over a Life Span (3)
Level 300: Semester 5
Core Courses
BIO223
Parasitology for Health Sciences (3)
BNS306 Introduction to Nursing Research (3)
BNS313 Introduction to Oncology and Palliative
Care (3)
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3)
BNS219 HIV and AIDS Education and Life Skills in
Botswana (3)
Level 300: Semester 6
Core Courses
BNS314 Principles and Practice of Community
Health Nursing (3)
BNS316 Community Health Nursing Practicum (4)
SOC332 Traditional and Alternative Health Systems
(3)
FHS200
Health Informatics (3)
Elective (3)
OPTIONAL COURSES
The student is expected to SELECT ONE course from the
list of courses Below.
ALL 152 Style in writing
BSW 202 Social Policy
EFH 201 Counselling over a Life Span
WINTER SEMESTER
BNS 318

Integrated Nursing Practice I (8)

Two months continuous rotation in in the following
areas; Infant & Child Health, Oncology wards, Community Health settings, and Adult and Aged care areas. Two
months integrated practice = 8 hours per day x 5 days =
40 hours per week x 8 weeks = 320 hours (32 Credits)
Level 400: Semester 7
Core Courses
BNS400 Leadership and Management in Nursing (3)
BNS417 Nursing Management of Adolescent
Health (3)
BNS411
Sexual and Reproductive Health and
Rights (3)
BNS413 Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights
Practice (4)
Optional (3)

Level 400: Semester 8
Core Courses
BNS412 Introduction to Critical Care Nursing (3)
BNS414 Introduction to Critical Care Nursing
Practice (4)
BNS 416 Mental Health and Psychiatric Nursing
(3)		
BNS418 Mental Health and Psychiatric Nursing
Practice (4)
WINTER SEMESTER`
BNS415 Integrated Nursing Practice II (8)
Two months integrated practice with continuous rotation in the following areas; Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Rights (SRHR), Psych-mental Health, Critical
Care/Accident & Emergency, Theatre and areas that
provide services for adolescents.
BNS COMPLETION STREAM LEVEL
Level 300: Semester 1
COM101
BIO223
BNS301
STA111
BNS306
ICT 121

Introduction to Communication and
Academic Literacy Skills for Health Sciences
(3)
Parasitology for Health Sciences (3)
Pathophysiology (3)
Elementary Statistics (3)
Introduction to Nursing Research (3)
Computing Skills Fundamentals (2)

Level 300: Semester 2
BIO120
BIO216
COM102
BNS200
ICT122
FHS200

Introductory Biochemistry (3)
General Microbiology (3)
Introduction to Communication and
Literacy skills (3)
Pharmacology (3)
Computing Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
Health Informatics (3)

Level 400: Semester 3
Core Courses
BNS313 Introduction to Oncology and Palliative Care
(3)
BNS411
Sexual & Reproductive Health and Rights (3)
BNS413 Sexual & Reproductive Health and Rights
Practice (4)
BNS400 Leadership and Management in Nursing (3)
BNS417 Nursing Management of Adolescents (3)
Level 400: Semester 4
Core Courses
BNS314 Principles and practice of Community
Health Nursing (3)
BNS316 Community Health Nursing Practice (4)
BNS412 Introduction to Critical Care Nursing (3)
BNS416 Mental Health and Psychiatric Nursing
(3)
BNS 418 Mental Health and Psychiatric Nursing
Practice (4)
WINTER BREAK

Optional Courses
The student is expected to SELECT ONE Course from the
list of Courses below
FCS310
POP303
POP304

Nutrition in the Life Span (3)
Urbanization, Migration and Development
(3)
Gender, Reproductive Health and
Development (3)

108

BNS414

Introduction to Critical Care Nursing
Practice (4)

3. Entrance Requirements for Bachelor of Nursing
Science: Completion stream Candidates for the Bachelor
of Nursing Science Completion stream will fulfil the
following requirements:

a) A Diploma in General Nursing or its equivalent;
b) A minimum of 2 years’ nursing experience after
completion of a Diploma in a General Nursing
Programme;
c) Current registration with the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of Botswana or its equivalent;
d) BGCSE or its equivalent with either a credit in
Combined Science or a pass in any one of Biology,
Chemistry or Physics and a pass in any other 4
subjects.
2. Assessment
a) Continuous assessment in Levels 200, 300 and 400
shall be based on tests and/or assignments, and where
applicable, clinical practice.
11.1 The ratio of continuous assessment to end of
semester examination shall be 1:1
11.2 The student shall complete all pieces of practical/
clinical/project/ work assignments by the end of the
examination period.
11.3 The student who fails to submit practical and clinical
work assignment on time shall receive an incomplete
(I) mark.
11.4 The student who has an ‘I’ mark shall complete the
work by the end of the supplementary examination
period
11.5 A student who fails to complete the practical/
clinical/project work assignments by the end of the
supplementary examinations (for no valid reasons)
and shall be awarded a zero mark for that course.
11.6 Failure to submit reports and assignments within
24 hours on the scheduled date and time shall result
in subtraction of 5% every day to the final mark. A
student who fails to submit the assignments by one
week (for no valid reasons) shall be awarded a zero
mark.

SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH

Head: Assoc. Prof. Bontle Mbongwe - Ph.D (University
of Pretoria), MSc. (University of Ottawa); BEd.(University
of Toledo); BSc (University of Toledo); Dip. Env. Health
(University of Swaziland)
The School currently has one department, the
Department of Environmental Health. However, when
fully operational, it is envisaged that the school will have
five departments: Environmental & Occupational Health,
Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Health Management,
Behavioural Sciences for Health and Reproductive
Health.

DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH

Head: Assoc. Prof. Bontle Mbongwe - Ph.D (University
of Pretoria), MSc. (University of Ottawa); BEd.(University
of Toledo); BSc (University of Toledo); Dip. Env. Health
(University of Swaziland)
1. Departmental Regulations for the Undergraduate
Program
General Provisions
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply:
Programs and Titles of Degrees:
The Department currently offers one program in Environmental Health leading to the Bachelor of Science
degree in Environmental Health (BSc –EH degree). The
Department is also working on offering a Bachelor of
Science degree in Occupational Health.
Bachelor of Science (Environmental Health or BSc- EH
degree)

c) The above Regulations shall apply to both Generic
(Pre-service) and In-service Bachelor of Nursing Science Streams.

2. Entrance requirements
Prospective students must:
a) If entering the program through the direct entry
route, satisfy the University of Botswana General Academic Regulation 20.21 and the Faculty of Science
Special Regulation 23.2 of the Faculty of Science. If
already registered under the Faculty of Science under
the General BSc Program, must have obtained at
least a grade C in BIO 111 & 112; CHE 101&102; MAT
111&122; PHY111,119,121&129 at first year level.

d) General Regulations 00.811 to 00.826 and 00.842
shall apply to the Bachelor of Nursing Science Degree.

b) If possessing a Diploma, satisfy General Academic
Regulation 20.24.

3. Progression from Semester to Semester
To proceed from one semester to the next, a student
must pass all courses and have a cumulative GPA of 2.0
or above as specified in General Regulation 00.842.

c) Applicants with a Diploma in Environmental Health
shall be admitted into level 200 or 300 of the degree
programme on the basis of accumulated credits in
the area of environmental health.

4. Award of Degree
To be awarded a Degree, a student must satisfy the
relevant General Academic Regulations 00.851 and
00.852. The Degree shall be classified in accordance with
the provisions of General Academic Regulations 20.4,
with the cumulative GPA of 2.0 or above completed in
accordance with General Regulation 00.86. Faculty of
Education.

d) If possessing other entry qualifications deemed relevant by the Department, satisfy General Academic
Regulation 20.22 or General Academic Regulation
20.23.

b)

The ratio of continuous assessment to an end of
semester examination shall be 1:1, unless otherwise
specified in the Departmental Special Regulations.

3. Programme structure for the Bachelor of Science
degree in Environmental Health
Semester 1
Core Courses
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4)
BIO111
Principles of Biology (4)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics, Mechanics, Vibrations
and Waves (4)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4)

109

COM101
ICT121

Communications and Academic Literacy
Skills (Health Sciences and Pre-Med) (3)
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2)

Semester 2
Core Courses
BIO112
Diversity of Plants and Animals (4)
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4)			
[Prerequisite CHE 101]
PHY122 Electricity and Magnetism (4)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4) 		
[Prerequisite MAT 111]
COM102 Health Communication (Health Sciences
and Pre-Med) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
[Prerequisite ICT 121
Semester 3
Core Courses
ENH211
Introductions to Environmental Health (4)
URP110
Introductions to Planning and Built
Environment (3)
ENH222 Epidemiology (3)
BIO211
Cell Biology (3)
BIO301
Quantitative Biology (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
ARB124 Environment and Comfort (2)
FHS200
Health Informatics (3)
BIO216
General Microbiology (3) 		
[Prerequisite BIO111 & BIO 112]
ENH221 Principles and Practice of Health Education
(4)
ENH223 Control of Communicable Diseases (3)
BIO232
Human Physiologies (3)
Semester 5
Core Courses
FCS204
Introductory to Housing (3)
ENH313 Basic Toxicology (3) 			
[Prerequisite BIO 211]
CCB315
Environmental Engineering (3)
ENH322 Food Hygiene and Safety (4) 		
[Prerequisite BIO 216]
ENH330 Liquid & Solid Waste Management (4)
[Prerequisite PHY 122]
Semester 6
Core Courses
ENH321 Environmental Health Sampling and
Analysis (4)
[Pre-requisites ENH 211 & ENH 313]
ENH323 Occupational Health, Safety & Hygiene (4)
[Prerequisites ENH 211 & ENH 313]
ENH334 Food Technology and Meat Hygiene (4)
[Prerequisite ENH 322]
LAW338
Law and the Environment (3)
PHY367
Elements of Air Pollution I (3)
Winter Semester
ENH331 Internship (4)
Semester 7
Core Courses
ENH411
Environmental Health Risk Assessment (3)
[Prerequisites ENH 313; ENH 323; ENH 321;
PHY 367]
ENH412 Environmental Health Seminars (3)
ENH414 Operational Management for Health
Practice (3)
ENS362
Environment & Disease (3)

ENS403
ENS450

Environmental Hazards and Disaster
Management (3)
African Environments (3)

Semester 8
Core Courses
ENS318
Water Resources, Development &
Management (3)
ENH415 Inspection, Compliance and Practice (3)
[Pre-requisites ENH322, ENH323, ENH411,
URP303]
ENH422 Research Project in Environmental Health
(3) [Prerequisite ENH 412]
ENH423 Case Studies (3)
4. Assessment
1. Continuous Assessment shall be according to General
Academic Regulations 00.81 and shall be based on tests
and/or assignments and/or practical.
2. Final Examinations shall be conducted according to
General Academic Regulations 00.82.
5. Progression from Semester to Semester
To proceed from one semester to the next, shall be
according to General Academic Regulation 00.9.
6. Award of Degree
To be awarded a degree, a student must satisfy the relevant General Academic Regulations 00.85. The Degree
shall be classified in accordance with the provisions of
General Academic Regulations 20.4, with the cumulative GPA of 2.0 or above calculated in accordance with
General Academic Regulation 00.86.

110

111

FACULTY OF HUMANITIES

ACTING DEAN
Prof. Fidelis Nkomazana, BA, PGDE (UB) MA, PhD
)University of Edinburgh

DEPUTY DEAN
)Prof. Thapelo Otlogetswe,BA, PGDE (UB
)MPhil (Oxford), PGCert (Brighton), PhD (Pretoria

FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR
)L. Monei, DABS (UB), BSc HRM (Cyprus
)MSc Management (University of Northampton

AFRICAN LANGUAGES AND LITERATURE
ENGLISH

HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER

FRENCH

N.A Nkanga, BA, MLIS (UB
)MSc HRM (University of Cardiff

HISTORY
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION STUDIES
MEDIA STUDIES
THEOLOGY AND RELIGIOUS STUDIES
CHINESE STUDIES
PORTUGUESE
VIRTUAL AND PERFORMING ARTS

112

FACULTY OF
HUMANITIES
Although for administrative purposes the Departments
of Environmental Science and Sociology are located in
other Faculties, they are considered academically to be
part of the Faculty of Humanities. In fact, a considerable
number of students who major in Environmental
Science and Sociology are Humanities students. With
the flexibility that is afforded by semesterised courses,
more departments in the Faculties of Business and
Science will become accessible to Humanities students,
especially through cross-faculty programmes. With
the new focus on educating specialists in a generalist
way, the Faculty values a well-rounded education with
the requisite ICT and numeracy skills. The Faculty of
Humanities concentrates mainly on those studies that
specialise in understanding human ideas, behaviour,
culture and its mediation, with a particular emphasis
on humanity in Africa in relation to the rest of the
world. This Faculty thus has a prime role to play in the
discovery and the appreciation of the heritage and
liberal arts of the societies of Africa in general and
of southern Africa and Botswana in particular. In this
regard, the Faculty of Humanities, through research and
teaching in its academic departments, is in a privileged
position to effectively contribute to the realization of
the Vision and Mission of the University. In addition, the
Faculty of Humanities contributes to human resource
development by assisting in the training of teachers. The
departments in the Faculty provide the content base for
secondary school and tertiary level teachers of English,
Setswana, French, History/Social Studies, Geography
and Religious/Moral Education by offering majors in the
Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Education and the Masters
of Education Degrees in these disciplines. As the Faculty
continues to implement the provisions of the Tenth
National Development Plan (NDP 10), the semesterised
academic programmes, and also plans new programmes
within the plan period, it shall simultaneously address
the requirements of the Revised National Policy on
Education as well as the aspirations of the National
Vision 2016. It will also position itself strategically
within the plan period processes to face the challenges
brought about by diminishing budget allocations and
competition for fewer resources.
22.0 Special Regulations for the Faculty of
Humanities
22.1 Preamble
22.11 The following are the Faculty’s Special Regulations
and shall apply subject to the General Academic
Regulations
22.12 In addition to these Special Regulations, relevant
Special Departmental Regulations shall also apply.
22.2 Entrance Requirements
22.21 Admission into the Humanities Degree
Programmes shall be on the basis of
performance in the Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE)
examination, or its equivalent, in humanities
(languages, geography, social studies,
history, moral/religious education, and
science (cf.22.22a), and also See Regulation
22.22a for other qualifying subjects)
22.22

Applicants who register for Bachelor’s
Degree programmes in Humanities shall be
required
a) To have taken at least five subjects,
including
English
Language,
at

the Botswana General Certificate
of Secondary Education (BGCSE)
examination or its equivalent;
b) To have obtained a credit in the English
language.
22.23

An applicant who has taken relevant
Advanced (A) ñ level or equivalent
examinations and attained a minimum of
one E and two C’s in the relevant subjects
may be admitted to a Bachelor degree in
Humanities programmes.

22.24

If an applicant has grade E or better
at Advanced (A)-Level or equivalent
qualifications in relevant subjects s/he
may, subject to the recommendation of
the relevant Head of Department and the
approval of the Dean’s Office, be awarded
credits and exempted from equivalent
course/s prescribed for a degree programme.

22.25

A student who may transfers from a
recognized university, or any other
institution of higher learning, and on
the submission of a transcript of his/
her academic records may, subject to the
recommendation of the relevant Head of
Department and the approval of the Dean’s
Office, be awarded credits and exempted
from equivalent course/s prescribed for a
degree programme.

22.3 General Provisions
22.31 A course may consist entirely of fieldwork,
project work, practical-work, seminar or
tutorials or any combination of these
components. In addition to work during the
semester, a course may include prescribed
fieldwork or assignments during university
vacation periods.
22.32 Unless otherwise provided in the departmental
regulations, all courses are semester long.
22.33 For ease of reference, the use of course codes
shall provide information as follows: the first
digit refers to the level of study, the second
to the status and orientation of the course,
and the last digit to the number of course in
each category.
22.4 Degree Structure
22.41In accordance with General Academic
Regulation 00.211, Departments in the
Faculty of Humanities shall offer courses
which shall be prescribed in Departmental
Special Regulations.
22.42

The Faculty of Humanities shall, depending
on the core course in the subject area offer
the following degree programmes:
a) Bachelor of Arts which is composed of
core and optional courses from African
languages and Literature, English, French,
History, Archaeology, Environmental
Science, Sociology, Psychology and
Theology and Religious Studies subjects.
b) Bachelor of Fine Arts
c) Bachelor of Arts in Chinese Studies

113

d) Bachelor of Library and Information
Studies which is composed of core and
optional courses from the Department of
Library and Information Studies
e) Bachelor of Arts in Library and
Information Studies which is composed
of core and optional courses from Library
and Information Studies and another
subject available as a major to Humanities
students.
f) Bachelor of Information Systems
(Information Management) which is
composed of core and optional courses
from the Faculty of Business, Department
of Computer Science and Department of
Library and Information Studies.
g) Bachelor of Information and Knowledge
Management which is composed of core
and optional courses from Library and
Information Studies.
h) Bachelor of Media Studies which is
composed of core and optional courses
from the Department of Media Studies.
i) Bachelor of Arts (Media Studies) which is
composed of core and optional courses
from Media Studies and another subject
available as a major to Humanities
students.
j) Bachelor of Arts (Pastoral Studies) which
is composed of core and optional
courses from Department of Theology
and Religious Studies; Department of
Psychology; Department of Social Work.
22.43 A combined degree (major/major) shall be a
programme composed of core and optional
courses from two equally-weighted subjects
which are concurrently studied. In order to
partially satisfy the requirement for a degree,
a student must take and pass a minimum of
40 credits from each of the two subjects.
22.44 A combined degree (major/minor) shall
be a programme composed of core and
optional courses from two subjects. In
order to partially satisfy the requirements
for a degree, a student must take and pass
a minimum of 56 credits from the major
subject and a minimum of 24 credits from
the minor subject.
22.45 In Semesters 1 and 2 (Level 1) of a degree
programme, each student shall take Courses
in English as well as courses from at least two
of the following subjects: African Languages
and Literature, French, Environmental
Science, History, Sociology, Theology and
Religious Studies, Psychology.
22.46 In addition to core and optional courses, and in
compliance with the General Regulation 00.2124d,
each student shall, unless exempted, take two
credits of General Education Courses in each of
Area 1, Communication and Academy Literacy
Skills and Area 2, Computer Skills Fundamentals, in
each of Semesters 1 and 2 of his/her programme.
In addition, a student shall register for a minimum

of twelve credits of General Education Courses
offered outside the Faculty of Humanities before
completing his/her programme of study.
22.47 Departments may specify projects that each
student shall carry out as partial fulfilment of
the requirements for the award a degree, based
on an investigation of some original theme in
his/her major subject under the supervision of an
academic member of staff. This study shall be for
one semester and normally take place during the
course of the programme. The mode of assessment
shall be as prescribed under Special Departmental
Regulations. There shall only be one such project
per programme.
22.5 Assessment
22.51 Continuous Assessment (CA) shall be as prescribed
in General Academic Regulations.
22.52 The examination in a course, whenever
required, shall normally be held during the examination
period at the end of the semester in which the
course is taught.
22.53 Performance in each course shall normally be
evaluated according to stipulated departmental
requirements. Any departure from indicated ratios
shall require the approval of the Faculty Board.
22.54 Overall performance in a course shall be assessed
on a Percentage Scale, a Letter Grade and a Grade
Point in accordance with General Regulations.
2.7 Award of Degree
22.71 To be awarded a degree, a student must satisfy
the appropriate provision of General Academic
Regulations from core and optional/ elective/
general education courses.

DEPARTMENT OF AFRICAN
LANGUAGES & LITERATURE

Bachelor of Arts Degree in African Languages and
Literature
General Provisions
Subject to the provisions of General Academic
Regulations and the Faculty of Humanities Special
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply for the Bachelor of Arts Degree in the
Department of African Languages and Literature.
Career Opportunities for the African Languages and
Literature Graduates
There are several career opportunities for African
Languages and Literature graduates (B.A. Single Major
and B.A Combined degree [Single Major, Major/Major,
Major/Minor]) in government, Parastatal organizations
and the Private Sector. The career opportunities include:
education (teaching in schools and colleges), University
academic posts, translation and interpretation for public
and private organizations, literary and textual expertise
for publishing companies, curriculum development for
the Ministry of Education, communication expertise in
local languages for Mass media professions, creative
writing, public relations, tourist guiding, and cultural
expertise for culture-based organizations.
Programme Structure
Level 100
At Level 100 (Semesters 1 and 2), the Programme shall
consist of a total of 6 credits made up of 2 core courses
per semester.

Level 200
At Level 200 (Semesters 3 and 4), the Programme shall
consist of a total of 6 credits made up of 2 core courses
per semester.
Levels 300 and 400
At Levels 300 and 400 (Semesters 5 to 8), the Programme
shall comprise a Single Major, a Combined Major, a Major/
Minor, Minor/Major and Multi-disciplinary Streams.
a) Single Major in African Languages and Literature
The Single Major Programme shall consist of a
total of 18 credits made up of 3 core courses and 3
optional courses per semester, leading to the award
of B.A. (African Languages and Literature)
b) Combined Major/Major in African Languages and
Literature
The Combined Major/Major Programme shall
consist of a total of 9 credits made up of 2 core
courses and 1optional course per semester, leading
to the award of B.A.
c) Combined Major/Minor with African Languages
and Literature as a Major
The Combined Major/Minor with African Languages
and Literature as a Major shall consist of 12 credits
made up of 2 core courses and 2 optional courses
per semester, leading to the award of B.A.
d) Combined Minor/Major with African Languages
and Literature as a Minor
The Combined Minor/Major Programme with African
Languages and Literature as a Minor shall consist of a
total of 6 credits made up of 1 core course and 1 optional
course per semester, leading to the award of B.A, if the
student is registered in the Faculty of Humanities.
e) Multi-disciplinary Combined Degree Programme
The
Multi-disciplinary
Combined
Degree
Programme in African Languages and Literature
shall consist of a minimum of 6 credits in
accordance with Departmental Regulation 07.3.5
and General Regulation 00.62.
General Education Courses
The Department of African Languages and Literature
offers three (3) General Education Courses (GECs).
Assessment and Examination
1.3.1 Performance in each course shall be evaluated by a
combination of continuous assessment and final
examination marks.
1.3.2 Continuous assessment shall normally constitute at
least two pieces of work or one long paper per
semester.
1.3.3 The duration of the final examination shall be two
hours.
Progression
In order to proceed from one semester to the next, a
student must maintain a cumulative GPA in accordance
with General Regulation 00.9.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
ALL122
The Characteristics of Human Language (3)
ALL141
Introduction to African Oral and Written
Literature (3)
General Education Courses
COM111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (3)
ICT111
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)

114

Optional Courses
ALL131
Language and Communication in Africa (3)
ALL132
Language Instruction I: (Beginners 		
Course in one of the Botswana Languages)
(3)
ALL151
Short Story Theory and Practice (3)
ALL152
Style in Writing (3)
Semester 2
Core Course
ALL121
Introduction to the Study of Language
and Linguistics (3)
ALL142
The Study of Drama in Indigenous
		
Languages (3)
General Education courses
COM112 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (3)
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2) (CORE)
Optional Courses
ALL134
Language Instruction II Pre: ALL132 (3)
ALL153
Introduction to the African Novel (3)
ALL154
Theory of Humour in Africa (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ALL221
Sound Systems in African Languages (3)
ALL241
History and Structure of the Setswana
Novel (3)
Optional Courses
ALL231
The Perception and Transcription of
African Language Sounds (3)
ALL232
Language Instruction III Pre: ALL 134 (3)
ALL251
Folk Speech in Africa (3)
ALL252
Rites of Passage: A Study of Social 		
Dramas (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
ALL222
Structure of Words in African Languages (3)
ALL242
African Written Poetry (3)
Optional Courses
ALL233
Generative Phonology in
African Languages (3)
ALL234
Language Instruction IV Pre: ALL 232 (3)
ALL253
The Sociology of Literature (3)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
ALL321
The Structure of the Sentence (3)
ALL322
The Structure of Meaning (3)
ALL341
Introduction to Literary Theory (3)
Optional Courses
ALL331
Introduction to Translation (3)
ALL332
Language Instruction V Pre: ALL 234 (3)
ALL333
Introduction to Research Methods (3)
ALL351
Politics and Southern African Poetry (3)
ALL352
Epic Performance in Africa (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
ALL323
Introduction to Stylistics and Discourse
Analysis (3)
ALL342
African Oral Narratives (3)
ALL343
Introduction to African Popular
Theatre (3)
Optional Courses
ALL334
Introduction to Modern Theories in
Grammatical Analysis (3)

ALL335
ALL336
ALL353
ALL354

Language Instruction Course VI
Pre: ALL332 (3)
Field Research Preparation and Proposal
Writing Pre: ALL333 (3)
African Oral Literature and the Media (3)
The Contemporary Setswana Novel (3)

ALL131 Language and Communication in Africa (3)
The content of the course will include a study of the
communication devices among human beings, with
special reference to Africa. The course will also cover
speech acts, writing systems as well as language
acquisition phases and functions of language.

Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
ALL421
Introduction to Historical and 		
Comparative Linguistics Based on Africa (3)
ALL422
A Sociolinguistic Study of
Southern Africa (3)
ALL441
World Literature in Setswana Translation (3)

ALL132 Language Instruction I (Beginners Course in one
of the Botswana Languages) (3)
The content will include an introduction to the culture
and history of one of the Botswana languages and
training in the basic use of the language such as essential
expressions and self-expression. The course will also
introduce the students to some of the basic structures
of the language.

Optional Courses
ALL431
Introduction to Psycholinguistics (3)
ALL432
Language Instruction VII Pre: ALL335 (3)
ALL433
Research Project: Data Collection
Pre: ALL336 (3)
ALL451
Studies in African Aesthetics (3)
ALL452
Popular Culture in Africa (3)
ALL453
Women’s Literature in Botswana (3)

ALL134 Language Instruction II (3)
The content of the course will include a study of the
current state of one of the Botswana languages as
well as a study of some selected areas of usage such as
reporting, expressing one’s feelings or seeking attention.
The course will also introduce the students to the
description of the language’s morphology and syntax.

Semester 8
Core Courses
ALL423
The Bantu and Khoesan Languages of
Southern Africa (3)
ALL442
Creative Writing, Theory and Practice (3)
ALL443
Oral Poetry in Botswana (3)
Optional Courses
ALL434
Introduction to Applied Linguistics (3)
ALL435
Language Instruction VIII Pre: ALL432 (3)
ALL436
Research Project: Data Analysis and
Interpretation Pre: ALL433 (3)
ALL454
Children’s Traditions and Dramatics (3)
ALL455
Postcolonial Theory and African 		
Literature (3)
ALL456
Introduction to African Thought (3)
		
General Education Courses (GECs)
Semester 1
GEC261
Languages of Botswana (3)
GEC262 Introduction to Cultural Studies (3)
Semester 2
GEC361
Introduction to Rhetoric and Public
Speaking (3)

AFRICAN LANGUAGES & LITERATURE COURSE
DESCRIPTIONS
ALL121 Introduction to the Study of Language and
Linguistics (3)
The content of the course will cover the study of
human language and its significance in human life. It
will also deal with linguistics as the scientific approach
to language study, the branches of linguistics, how it is
related to other disciplines and how linguistics can be
applied to certain professions.
ALL122 The Characteristics of Human Language (3)
The content of this course will include an overview of
the various theories about the origin of language and the
relationship between language origin, the development
of society and the structure of the brain. The course will
also examine the difference between human language
and animal communication as well as the unique
characteristics of human language.

ALL141 Introduction to African Oral and Written
Literature (3)
The content will include a study of sub-genres of
African oral and written literatures such as oral and
written stories (novel inclusive), oral and written poetry,
traditional drama and written plays and their form
and functions in society as well as how content and
meaning in such literatures are manipulated in order to
differentiate insider/writer from outsider/ reader as well
as men from women.
ALL142 The Study of Drama in Indigenous
Languages (3)
The course deals with intrinsic and extrinsic aspects of
drama with emphasis on the fact that plays are not
primarily intended for reading but to be performed.
ALL151 Short Story Theory and Practice (3)
The course deals with theories of the short story but
much of the time will be spent on reading short stories,
critically analyzing them at the same time appreciatively
enjoying and getting involved in their production.
ALL152 Style in Writing (3)
The course will deal mainly with the relationship between
the author, the text and the readers with emphasis
on aspects of style that enable messages to reach the
addressees.
ALL153 Introduction to the African Novel (3)
The course will basically introduce students to genre
classification, textual analysis of the novel and the sociopolitical as well as the gender and cultural history from
which it emerged.
ALL154 Theory of Humour in Africa (3) (Shelved)
The course will focus on the structure and function of
various types of the joke genre in Africa with a special
focus on the text, context and performance aspects. The
issue of gender and the influence of modern technology
and the media on the genre will also be scrutinized.
COM 111 Communication and Academic Literacy Skills
I (3)
This course is designed to assist students develop
balanced proficiency in the four major communicative
skills of listening, reading, speaking, and writing for
academic and general purposes.

115

COM 112 Communication and Academic Literacy Skills
II (3)
This course is designed to provide development of
writing proficiency through intensive instruction
in academic writing skills and teaches students the
rhetorical principles and writing practices necessary for
producing effective business letters, memos, reports, and
collaborative projects in professional contexts.
ALL221 Sound Systems in African Languages (3)
The course content will include the definition of
phonology, phonemic analysis and the function of
distinctive features. The course will also consider the
structure of the syllable and other prosodic phenomena.
ALL222 Structure of Words in African Languages (3)
The content of the course will include the definition and
scope of morphology, the morpheme and its various
types as well as allomorphic variation. The course will
then focus on the various types of morphemes and
apply the principles underlying word formation, analysis
to an African language; discuss the processes of term
development in Setswana.
ALL231 The Perception and Transcription of African
Language Sounds (3)
The content of the course will include practice in
identifying, describing and transcribing speech sounds.
Also students will be trained in classifying the sounds
according to shared phonetic features.
ALL232 Language Instruction III (3)
The course content will include a discussion of the
current state of one of the Botswana languages and
then train the students in oral and aural skills, texts
comprehension and an introduction to the literature
created in the language. It will also provide skills in the
description of the structure of the target language.
ALL233 Generative Phonology in African Language
Analysis (3)
The course content will include an introduction to
generative phonology followed by the study of
segmental, auto-segmental and metrical phonology.
Setswana and one other African language will be used
as case studies.
ALL234 Language Instruction IV (3)
The course content will include the discussion of the
salient issues concerning the current and future
situation of one of the Botswana languages. The
course will enhance the students’ oral and aural skills,
text comprehension and a good understanding of the
literature created in the language.
ALL241 History and Structure of the Setswana Novel (3)
The course will include an exploration of the evolution
of the novel genre over time among the Setswana
speaking peoples of Southern Africa and how it has
been influenced by the social, cultural and political
environment of the epoch of its composition and
production, especially in terms of structure, artistic style
and themes.
ALL242 African Written Poetry (3)
The course will include a holistic theoretical approach
to African written poetry utilizing the Reader response,
New Historicism and Feminist theories. Included will be
the structure of poetry and the influences of various
epochs on the form and content of African written
poetry.
ALL251 Folk Speech in Africa (3)
The content of the course will cover aspects of
performance, aesthetics, form and function of the

various communicative speech acts such as proverbs,
riddles, epithets, euphemisms and dysphemisms. The
focus of the study will be on both literary texts and
everyday discourse.
ALL252 Rites of Passage: A Study of Social Dramas (3)
The course content will cover performance, structural
patterns and functions of the calendar and life cycle
ritual ceremonies that affect the individual and the
community. Also the importance of symbolism, roleplay and reversal of roles will be explored from various
theoretical perspectives.
ALL253 The Sociology of Literature (3)
Basically, the course will include the importance of
sociological considerations in understanding literature.
These encompass the writer’s social situation, the
production and the consumption of written literature
and the impact of the historical, cultural and political
environment on the production and consumption.
ALL321 The Structure of the Sentence (3)
The course content will include the discussion of the
principles and methods of sentence analysis focusing
on the basic structure of the sentence. The standard
generative grammar model will be used in sentence
analysis, based on Setswana.
ALL322 The Structure of Meaning (3)
The course content will include the definition of
meaning, types of meaning, semantic features and
lexical relations. It will also consider the modes of
meaning interpretation, context, deictic expressions,
presuppositions and speech acts.
ALL323 Introduction to Stylistics and Discourse Analysis
(3)
The content of the course will include the study of
register, stylistic variation, discourse devices, discourse
appropriateness and conversation structure.
ALL331 Introduction to Translation (3)
The course content will comprise the theory of
translation; types, modes and problems of translation;
the role of semantics, pragmatics and discourse analysis
in translation and structural adaptation. Case studies
will be taken from the Botswana languages as well as
international languages spoken in Botswana.
ALL332 Language Instruction V (Beginners’ Level) (3)
The content of the course will include an introduction to
the culture and history of one of the major languages
of Africa and training in the basic use of the language,
such as essential expressions and self-expression. The
course will also introduce the students to some of the
basic structures of the language.
ALL333 Introduction to Research Methods (3)
The course will introduce students to both quantitative
and qualitative research paradigms in African Languages
and Literature. Also the content will include objectivity
in scientific research, topic selection, definition of the
problem, significance of a research study, formulation of
hypotheses, research methodology, literature review and
research proposal framework.
ALL334 Introduction to Modern Theories in Grammatical
Analysis (3)
The course content will include a study of the current
conception of grammar, the modern grammatical
theories, and their application to African language
description.

ALL335 Language Instruction Course VI (3)
The course content will include the study of the current
state of one of the major languages of Africa as well as a
study of some selected areas of usage such as reporting,
expressing one’s feelings or seeking attention etc. Also,
the course will introduce the students to the description
of the language’s morphology and syntax.
ALL336 Field Research Preparation and Proposal Writing
(3)
The course will include techniques of fieldwork, data
collection as well as archival research, resource planning,
ethical issues and how to write a research proposal.
ALL337 Introduction to Computational Linguistics (3)
The course will introduce the students to a variety
of topics in computer-based language analysis and
processing among which three will be examined in a
given semester. These topics will include: computational
syntax, computational phonology, computational
semantics, computational lexicography, speech
synthesis, and machine translation.
ALL341 Introduction to Literary Theory (3)
The course content will include five literary theories
(mainly Structuralism, Psychoanalysis, Reception,
Marxism and Deconstruction) from which at least three
will be selected for discussion in a particular semester.
ALL342 African Oral Narratives (3)
The course will cover various sub-genres of
institutionalized sub-Saharan African oral narratives
such as myths, folktales and legends that will be studied,
analyzed and interpreted from various theoretical
viewpoints.
ALL343 Introduction to African Popular Theatre (3)
The course content will include the history of Popular
Theatre in Africa from the pre-colonial to the
postcolonial era with reference to socioeconomic
problems facing Africa. Emphasis will be on practical
drama and performances in schools and villages
within the concept of intervention-participationconscientisation.
ALL351 Politics and Southern African Poetry (3)
The course content will include an analysis and
interpretation of translated or transcribed oral poetry
that deals with socio-political criticism and the
influence thereof of oral traditions on political poetry in
general. Also included will be the influence of Negritude
and African- American poetry on Southern African
protest and resistance poetry.
ALL352 Epic Performance in Africa (3)
The content of the course will include basic characteristics
of African epics, their historical contexts, and the mode
of delivery to the audience.
ALL353 African Oral Literature and the Media (3)
The content will include a study of the multiple ways in
which the mass media influence oral literature and how
oral literature permeates media-manipulated texts and
contexts as well as how it is portrayed by the media in
its various forms.
ALL354 The Contemporary Setswana Novel (3)
The course will include a critical analysis of artistic styles,
thematic trends, inter-textual relationships and literary
quality of the Setswana novels recently written and
published in Botswana and South Africa.
ALL421 Introduction to Historical and Comparative
Linguistics based on Africa (3)
The course will include an introduction to historical and

116

comparative linguistics as a discipline and then look at
how this approach has been used in the comparison,
classification and accounting for patterns of change in
the languages of Africa.
ALL422 A Sociolinguistic Study of Southern Africa (3)
The course will include the patterns of language use in
Botswana, the factors that influence language change
and maintenance and the various efforts, both formal
and informal, which are being made in order to preserve,
promote and empower languages.
ALL423 The Bantu and Khoesan Languages of Southern
Africa (3)
The course content will consist of the origin and
migration of the Bantu and Khoe-San language
speakers, the settling of the Bantu languages in the
Southern African region, the classification of the Bantu
and Khoe-San languages and their major characteristics.
ALL431 Introduction to Psycholinguistics (3)
The course will include the various approaches
to psycholinguistics, language production and
comprehension, the biological foundations of language
and language pathology.
ALL432 Language Instruction VII (3)
The course content will include discussion of the
current state of one of the major languages of Africa,
comprehension texts and an introduction to the
literature created in the language, oral and aural skills
and structural analysis.
ALL433 Research Project: Data Collection (3)
The research project will be carried out through regular
consultation with the relevant lecturer and will lead to
the collection of data on the chosen research topic and
documentation of the research findings.
ALL434 Introduction to Applied Linguistics (3)
The course content will include the study of mental
representation of grammar, the child’s processing of
grammar, the psycholinguistic approach to mental
process and the language learning processes.
ALL435 Language Instruction VIII (3)
The course synopsis will include a discussion of the salient
issues concerning the current state and future situation
of one of the major languages of Africa, advanced
comprehension texts and a good understanding of the
literature created in the language, advanced oral and
aural skills and an in-depth descriptive knowledge of
the language.
ALL436 Research Project: Data Analysis and
Interpretation (3)
The course will consist of supervised work on hands-on
data analysis, interpretation and research report writeup.
ALL441 World Literature in Setswana Translation (3)
The content of the course will include primarily
literary texts translated into Setswana from other
African languages, and secondly those translated from
foreign/non-African languages. A study of how (and
why) cultures are constructed, inter-textualized and
manipulated through translation will also be done.
ALL442 Creative Writing, Theory and Practice (3)
The content of this course includes techniques of writing
in three genres: short stories, plays (drama) and poems
(poetry).

ALL443 Oral Poetry in Botswana (3)
The course will cover the performance and significance
of the various forms of indigenous oral poetry that are
composed and rendered by oral artists under different
cultural and situational contexts in Botswana.
ALL451 Studies in African Aesthetics (3)
The course content will include theories of aesthetic
judgment and arguments propounded by philosophers,
artists, literary critics and consumers of objects of
aesthetic value.
ALL452 Popular Culture in Africa (3)
The course will include a study of culture, subcultures
and visual culture with emphasis on music, dance, films/
videos, television, computer and their inter-textual
relationship. It will also include the ideology of mass
culture, theories of consumption and its confrontation
with politics, religion and the spirit of conservatism.
ALL453 Women’s Literature in Botswana (3)
The course will include a study on various literary texts
created by women in Botswana from oral to written,
how they handle relations of power, sexuality and
gender issues, their vision and communicative strategies.
ALL454 Children’s Traditions and Dramatics (3)
The content of the course will include research on
children’s traditional games, storytelling, songs, and
methods of dramatic improvisation and creative writing
for children’s books.
ALL455 Postcolonial Theory and African Literature (3)
The course examines from a historical perspective the
national, transnational and translational boundaries
of culture with reference to colonial and post-colonial
literature.
ALL456 Introduction to African Thought (3) (Shelved)
The course content will include philosophical treatise
that exist within the discipline of African philosophy
and thought on various topics that by their very nature
raise questions of philosophical discussion.
GEC261 Languages of Botswana (3)
The content of the course will include the study of the
various language groups that settled in what is now
Botswana and how they have interacted over the years
to give rise to the current language situation. The course
will also discuss the role of Setswana as a national
language and English as an official language.
GEC262 Introduction to Cultural Studies (3)
The content of the course includes theories of cultural
production, practices and values in Africa. Sensitive
questions of ethnicity and multiculturalism are also
discussed.
GEC361 Introduction to Rhetoric and Public Speaking(3)
The content of the course will include aspects of African
literature, language and philosophy with reference to
interpersonal communication.

CHINESE STUDIES
PROGRAMME

Programme Regulations for the Bachelor of Arts
Degree in Chinese Studies
General provisions
The General Academic Regulations and the Faculty of
Humanities Special Regulations shall apply.

Entrance Requirements
Eligibility for admission to the programme shall be in
accordance with the General Academic Regulations
and the Faculty of Humanities Special Regulations 22.2,
except that the Faculty shall have discretion to admit
students who do not fully meet these requirements but
who have prior qualifications in Mandarin Chinese.
Programme Structure
Chinese studies at the University of Botswana shall
consist of the following programme:

CHN 406
CHN 407

Business Chinese (3)
Chinese Proficiency Test Level 4 (3)

STREAM LANGUAGE:
CHN 410 Fundamentals of Teaching Mandarin
Chinese as a Foreign Language (3)
CHN 411 Fundamentals of Translation and 		
Interpreting from Mandarin Chinese (3)
STREAM NON-LANGUAGE:
CHN 408 Dissertation (6)
CHN 409 Research Proposal (3)

Single Major
1.5 Options for a total of 9 credits will be selected
from a list of approved optional courses from other
departments.

1

SINGLE MAJOR:

1.1

The Chinese Studies programme is a
concentrated Single Major leading to a
Bachelor of Arts degree. This concentration
is necessary in view of the high language
standard to be mastered in four years.

1.2

Teaching will be in English at lower levels.
This is in accordance with international
best practice and is necessary because of
the relative difficulty of beginning Chinese.

1.3 To successfully complete the programme, students
will be required to obtain 125 credits.
1.4

The following will be the core courses:

Level 100
CHN 101
CHN 102
CHN 103
CHN 104
CHN 105
CHN 106

Basic Mandarin 1 (6)
Basic Mandarin 2 (6)
Introduction to China (3)
Understanding China (3)
Basic Practical Mandarin 1 (3)
Basic Practical Mandarin 2 (3)

COM 111
COM 112
ICT 111
ICT 112

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
Academic and Professional Communication
(3)
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (8)
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (8)

Level 200
CHN 201 Pre-Intermediate Mandarin 1 (6)
CHN 202 Pre-Intermediate Mandarin 2 (6)
CHN 203 Ancient and Imperial History of China (to
1911) (3)
CHN 204 Modern History of China (since 1911) (3)
CHN 205 Chinese Philosophy and Religion (3)
CHN 206 Political Economy of Contemporary China (3)
CHN 207 Introduction to Chinese Literature in
Translation (3)
CHN 209 Chinese for Travellers (3)
CHN 210 Introduction to Classical Chinese (2)
[OPTIONAL]
Level 300
CHN 307 Chinese Proficiency Test (HSK Level 3) (3)
CHN 309 Approaches and Methods in Chinese Studies
(3)
CHN 310 Attachment / Project (7)
CHN 311 Intermediate Mandarin 1 (6)
CHN 312 Intermediate Mandarin 2 (6)
CHN 313 Africa-China Relations (3)
Level 400
CHN 401 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 1 (3)
CHN 402 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 2 (3)
CHN404 China, Globalization and Changing Power
Relations (3)

117

1.5.1 It should be noted that due to the special nature
of this programme, all the Chinese Studies courses (both
language and non-language) are core. An exception is
CHN 210 Classical Chinese, which will be offered as an
optional course in Level 200. The offering of this highly
specialized course will depend on the availability of a
qualified course instructor. The programme does not
include any electives.
1.5.2 The following list is provided for this year (202122); however, the Faculty may alter the list at discretion
to take account of circumstances. (See regulations.) The
list below has been arranged by broad categories so as to
indicate areas of particular relevance.
BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS
BIS100
Introduction to Business Information
Systems (3)
ECO111
Basic Micro-economics (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro-economics (3)
ELC211
Introduction to Development Issues and
Perspectives (3)
INT200
Introduction to International Business (3)
INT201
International Business Environment (3)
INT300
Export-Import Marketing (pre-req. INT200)
(3)
INT301
International Trade Institutions (pre-req.
INT200) (3)
INT403
Globalization and Business (3)
INT404
Contemporary Issues in International
Business (3)
MGL201 Introduction to Logistics Management
(3)
MGL202 Introduction to Supply Chain Management
(3)
MGL203 Principles of Purchasing (3)
MGT 100 Principles of Management (3)
MGT200 Organizational Design and Development
(Pre-req. MGT100)(3)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3)
MKT300 International Marketing (3)
MKT303 Sales Management
(3)
MKT309 Internet Marketing (3)
MKT405 Tourism and Hospitality Marketing (3)
THM101 Principles of Tourism (3)
THM102 Introduction to Hospitality Management
(pre-req. THM101) (3)
THM104 Fundamentals of the Hospitality Industry
(pre-req. THM101)
(3)
THM308 International Tourism (3)
THM405 Tourism in Southern Africa (pre-req. THM
101) (3)

HISTORY AND POLITICS
ARC102
Introduction to World Prehistory (2)
EPS405
International Organizations and Governance
(3)
GEC273 The State and Society (2)
HIS102
Introduction to the Study of History (History
of Botswana) (2)
HIS104
Debates in Botswana History(2)
HIS211
The Rise of Europe to World Dominance (3)
HIS214
Agriculture and Industrialization in the
World Economy to 1945 (3)
HIS331
African Diaspora in the Islamic World & Asia
(3)
HIS333
Introduction to Foreign Policy Diplomacy &
International Relations, 1800 to 1945 (3)
HIS334
Superpowers in the 20th Century (3)
HIS412
Twentieth Century South Africa (3)
HIS433
Civilization & Modernization in China &
Japan (3)
HIS434
Colonialism and Independence in South Asia
(3)
HIS441
Slave Trade and Colonial Conquests in East
Africa (3)
HIS445
Globalization & Third World Economies in
Africa, Latin America & South-East Asia (3)
HIS446
Growth, Policy and Poverty in Africa, Latin
America, South and South-East Asia (3)
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration(3)
PAD201
Organization Theories (3)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
POL113
Foreign Policy and Diplomacy(3)
POL201
Botswana Politics (3)
POL306
International Political Economy (3)
POL 401 International Relations (3)
POL406
Africa in World Politics (3)
LANGUAGES AND LITERATURE
ALL331
Introduction to Translation (3)
ALL341
Introduction to Literary Theory (3)
ALL453
Women’s Literature in Botswana (3)
BFA400
Theatre History-Asia (3)
ELL290
Language Education Issues (3)
ENG121 Introduction to English Language 		
Description and Usage (3)
ENG212 Introduction to English Literature: The Novel
(3)
ENG213 Prose Literature of Southern Africa (3)
ENG223 The Drama of Southern Africa (3)
ENG233 The Poetry of Southern Africa(3)
ENG/GEC268 Literature of Liberation (2)
ENG333 Critical Issues in Modern African Literature:
Phases of Modern African Literature (3)
ENG334 Commonwealth Literature (3)
ENG373 Botswana Literature (3)
ENG412 Introduction to Shakespeare (3)
ENG416 Project/Essay in either Language or
Literature (3)
ENG424 The Novel in the Modern World (3)
ENG433 Introduction to Gender Issues
(3)
ENG434 Non-European World Literature (3)
ENG451 Introduction to Semantics (3)
EPL300
Theory and Practice of Second Language
Teaching (3)
FRE212
Business French (2)
FRE213
Introduction to French Literature (2)
FRE217
French Language (3)
FRE224
Conversation (3)
FRE227
French Language II (Pre-req. FRE217)(3)
FRE314
French Culture & Civilization (2)
FRE317
French for Tourism and Hospitality (Pre-req.
FRE227) (3)
FRE327
French for Tourism and Hospitality (Prereq. FRE317) (3)
GEC262 Introduction to Cultural Studies (2)

ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
ENS251
The Human Environment System(3)
ENS252
Botswana Environment (3)
ENS260
Environment and Population Dynamics (3)
ENS352
Globalization, Socio-Economic and 		
Environmental Change (3)

CHN 103: Introduction to China
The aim of this course is to introduce students to key
features and aspects of China so that they acquire a
basic general knowledge of the country and its history,
society and culture. The course covers topics such as
history, language, geography, culture and social life.

INFORMATION AND MEDIA STUDIES
BIM101
Introduction to Information Science
(3)
LIS100
The Information Environment (3)
LIS101
Introduction to Organizing Information
(3)
LIS206
Introduction to Infopreneurship (3)
LIS425
Global Information Systems (3)
BMS320 Media and Society (3)
BMS329 Development Communication(3)
BMS421 Current Issues in African Media (3)

CHN 104: Understanding China
This course provides an in-depth survey of aspects of
Chinese society and culture. It builds on the knowledge
that students have acquired in CHN 103 but aims to
be more analytical and reflective. The course takes
an interdisciplinary approach and provides a further
foundation for the continued study of traditional and
contemporary China.

LAW
GEC277
LAW215
LAW538
LAW542

Law and Society in Botswana (3)
Foundations of Business Law (3)
International Organizations (3)
International Trade Law (3)

PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION
GEC263 The Politics of Gender (2)
PST309
World Religions (3)
TRS103
Religions of Botswana (3)
TRS105
Asian Religions: A Survey (3)
TRS107
African Traditional Religions (3)
TRS222
Religion and development (3)
TRS402
Religion and Politics (3)
TRS304
African Philosophy and Culture (3)
TRS413
Hinduism (3)
TRS416
Religion and Modernity (3)
TRS418
Contemporary African Philosophy (3)
TRS424
Buddhism (3)
SOCIAL SCIENCES
ELC302
Gender Issues in Social Studies (3)
ELC311
Multicultural Education (3)
ELC312
Conflicts and Conflict Resolution in Africa (3)
ELC461
Human Rights Issues (3)
GEC278 The State and Society (2)
GEC372 Migration and Globalisation (2)
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts and
Principles (3)
SOC122 The Social Structure of Society (3)
SOC123 Introduction to Social & Cultural 		
Anthropology (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
SOC324 Sociology of Gender (3)
SOC424 African Social Thought (3)
2. Chinese Studies Course Descriptions
CHN 101: Basic Mandarin 1
This is a beginner’s course for learners with no prior
knowledge of Mandarin Chinese language. It introduces
students to basic features of Mandarin including
the phonetic system and grammatical system. The
course helps students acquire a basic vocabulary of
around 400 Chinese words and master expressions of
everyday language use. The emphasis is on listening
comprehension and oral skills.
CHN 102: Basic Mandarin 2
This course is for students who have completed Basic
Mandarin 1. The course teaches skills of reception
(reading and listening) and production (speaking and
writing) in Mandarin Chinese at basic level. In this course
students are expected to start acquiring basic translation
skills from Mandarin into English.

118

CHN 201: Pre-intermediate Mandarin Chinese 1
This is a pre-intermediate language course for students
who have successfully completed two semesters of
Mandarin Chinese at introductory level and who have
acquired a vocabulary of around 800 words. Students are
trained to communicate intelligibly in a variety of reallife situations in a Chinese speaking environment.
CHN 202: Pre-intermediate Mandarin Chinese 2
This is a pre-intermediate language course for students
who have successfully completed three semesters of
Mandarin Chinese. It builds on the foundation laid at
the previous levels but adds length and complexity to the
Chinese language used.
CHN 203: Ancient and Imperial History of China (to
1911)
The course examines the ancient history of China
from its prehistoric/ legendary starting point to the
establishment of the Chinese Imperial system. It then
looks at the imperial period from both a chronological
and thematic perspective. Finally it examines Imperial
China’s nineteenth century decline, including foreign
aggression, internal resistance and failed attempts to
modernize.
CHN 204: Modern History of China (since 1911)
China had a tumultuous history in the twentieth
century, including revolution, civil war, foreign invasion,
and political extremism. In order to understand China’s
present-day society and public affairs it is necessary to
understand this background. This course begins with the
1911 Revolution that ended the Empire. It then covers
the Republican era, the triumph of the Communist Party
in 1949 and the first decades of the People’s Republic
ending with Deng Xiaoping’ policy of Opening Up and
Reform.
CHN 205: Chinese Philosophy and Religion
The course introduces issues, developments and debates
of Chinese thought. It explores key concepts, such as
the Tao, Heaven and qi. The course reviews in detail the
crucial period of the “Hundred Schools” in which the
main Chinese traditions, including that of Confucius,
were established and explores how these traditions
evolved later on. The course also covers the introduction
of Buddhism to China, its acceptance and acquisition of
distinctively Chinese features.
CHN 206: Political Economy of Contemporary China
This course looks at modern-day China from the
perspective of the interaction between politics and
economics. It analyses four decades of economic and
political reform paying particular attention to the
political context of economic development and the
political and social consequences of economic reform.
The course aims to prepare students for a deeper
understanding of and independent thinking on modern
China.

CHN 207: Introduction to Chinese Literature in
Translation
This course introduces students to the broad development
and significance of Chinese literature through studying
representative sample texts in translation. The course
aims partly to prepare students for the Level 400 course
on Chinese literature in the original language.

CHN 402: Advanced Mandarin Chinese 2
This is the most advanced language proficiency course
offered in the Chinese Studies programme. It assists
students to reach a high level of language proficiency.
Students will be exposed to a variety of audio-visual
materials and required to discuss issues in both oral and
written form.

CHN 301: Intermediate Mandarin Chinese Reading and
Writing 1
This is an intermediate language course for students who
have successfully completed four semesters of Mandarin
Chinese. It teaches more advanced vocabulary and
syntax of Mandarin Chinese. Particular attention is paid
to training reading and writing skills in Chinese at the
intermediate level.

CHN 403: Africa’s Relations with China
The aim of this course is to critically explore the changing
structure of economic, political and people-to-people
relations between Africa and China. The course explores
Africa-China relations in the pre-colonial, colonial and
post-colonial era, but the main focus of the course is on
the past decades of rapidly changing relations between
Africa and China

CHN 302: Intermediate Mandarin Chinese Reading and
Writing 2
This is an intermediate language course for students
who have successfully completed five semesters of
Mandarin Chinese. It teaches more advanced vocabulary
and syntax of Mandarin Chinese. The course focuses on
comprehensive skills development at the intermediate
level.

CHN 404: China, Globalization & Changing Power
Relations
This course aims to examine the dynamic relationship
between China’s economic development and the
changing structure of the global economy since the end
of the twentieth century. It critically reviews debates on
the meaning, nature and direction of globalization as
well as how various countries, regions and other players
affect and are affected by this process with a special
focus on China.

CHN 303: Intermediate Mandarin Chinese Listening and
Speaking
This is an interactive Chinese language course at
intermediate level which mainly teaches listening and
speaking skills in Chinese language communication.
CHN 304: Chinese for Travelling
This is a language course which specifically teaches
communicative skills in Mandarin Chinese for travel
situations (e.g. to arrange a travel schedule, to book
tickets and hotels, etc.).
CHN 305: Chinese Speaking Societies in the World (in
English)
This course explores Chinese speaking communities
outside of Mainland China, such as those in South East
Asia, Australia, America and Africa. The course takes both
a geographical and thematic approach.
CHN 306: Hot Topics in Contemporary China (in English)
This course examines some of the key issues and debates
affecting present-day China. Students will be guided
through an examination of the historical background
of these issues, their contemporary dimensions and
different viewpoints on the way forward.
CHN 307: Chinese Proficiency Test (HSK Level 3)
This is a preparatory course for the Chinese language
proficiency test Hanyu shuiping kaoshi (HSK). It helps
students to achieve a Mandarin Chinese language
proficiency level that conforms to HSK level 3.
CHN 308: Chinese Proficiency Test (HSK Level 4)
This is a preparatory course for the Chinese language
proficiency test Hanyu shuiping kaoshi (HSK). It helps
students to achieve a Mandarin Chinese language
proficiency level that conforms to HSK level 4.
CHN 401: Advanced Mandarin Chinese 1
The course is intended for students who have successfully
completed six semesters of Mandarin Chinese. It
focuses on language use in real life communication. All
learning activities are organised to build up students’
comprehensive language abilities as a preparation
to participate in real life situations. The course trains
students to communicate fluently and appropriately.

CHN 405: Chinese Literature and Culture
This course gives students the opportunity to study a
sample of Chinese literature in the original Chinese. It
will include ancient texts, classical fiction and poetry.
A high level of proficiency in Mandarin Chinese is a
requirement for this course.
3. The Programme structure is as follows:
Level 100 Semester 1
COM 111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
ICT 111
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
CHN 101 Basic Mandarin 1 (6)
CHN 103 Introduction to China (3)
CHN 105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1 (3)
Total: 17 credits
Level 100 Semester 2
COM 112 Academic and Professional Communication
(3)
ICT 112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
CHN 102 Basic Mandarin 2 (6)
CHN 104 Understanding China (3)
CHN 106 Basic Practical Mandarin 2 (3)
Total: 17 credits
Level 200 Semester 1
CHN 201 Pre-Intermediate Mandarin 1 (6)
CHN 203 Ancient and Imperial History of China (to
1911) (3)
CHN 205 Chinese Philosophy and Religion (3)
CHN 209 Chinese for Travellers (3)
Total: 15 credits
Level 200 Semester 2
CHN 202 Pre-Intermediate Mandarin 2 (6)
CHN 204 Modern History of China (since 1911) (3)
CHN 206 Political Economy of Contemporary China (3)
CHN 207 Introduction to Chinese Literature in
Translation (3)
CHN 210 Introduction to Classical Chinese (2)
[OPTIONAL]
Total: 15 credits

119

Level 300 Semester 1
CHN 311 Intermediate Mandarin 1 (6)
CHN 307 Chinese Proficiency Test (HSK Level 3) (3)
CHN 309 Approaches and Methods in Chinese Studies (3)
CHN 313 Africa-China Relations (3)
Total: 15/17 credits
Level 300 Semester 2
CHN 310 Attachment / Project (7)
CHN 312 Intermediate Mandarin 2 (6)
1 Optional Course (3)
Total: 16 credits
Level 400 Semester 1
STREAM LANGUAGE:
CHN 401 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 1 (3)
CHN 404 China, Globalization and Changing Power
Relations (3)
CHN 407 Chinese Proficiency Test Level 4 (3)
CHN 411 Fundamentals of Translation and Interpreting
from Mandarin Chinese (3)
Relevant optional course (3)
Total: 15 credits
STREAM NON-LANGUAGE:
CHN 401 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 1 (3)
CHN 404 China, Globalization and Changing Power
Relations (3)
CHN 407 Chinese Proficiency Test Level 4 (3)
CHN 409 Research Proposal (3)
Relevant optional course (3)
Total: 15 credits
Level 400 Semester 2
STREAM LANGUAGE:
CHN 402 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 2 (3)
CHN 406 Business Chinese (3)
CHN 410 Fundamentals of Teaching Mandarin Chinese as
a Foreign Language (3)
Relevant optional course (3)
Language course from Confucius Institute at University
of Botswana (3)
Total: 15 credits
STREAM NON-LANGUAGE:
CHN 402 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 2 (3)
CHN 406 Business Chinese (3)
CHN 408 Dissertation (6)
Total: 15 credits
TOTAL CREDITS: 125
Students have the possibility to add one optional
course.
Year 4		
Semester One
CORE		
CHN401 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 1 (6)
CHN403 Africa’s Relations with China (3)
CHN405 Chinese Literature and Culture (3)
		
OPTIONAL
Choose one (1) from the list of approved options
Total credits: 15
		
Semester Two
CORE		
CHN402 Advanced Mandarin Chinese 2 (6)
CHN404 China, Globalization & Changing Power
Relations (3)
CHN406 Business Chinese (3)

OPTIONAL
Choose one (1) from the list of approved options

General Academic Regulation 20.4 to be awarded a
Degree.

Total credits: 15

Career Opportunities for Graduates of the Department
of English
1.5.1 Career prospects for Bachelor of Arts Degree holders
in English include professional employment in the
fields of:
a) Education, teaching at secondary and tertiary
levels or in the field of curriculum development
in the Ministry of Education,
b) Print and Electronic Media,
c) Publishing,
d) Public Relations,
e) The Civil Service.

4 Students with prior HSK qualifications in Chinese
language may, at the discretion of the Faculty, be given
credit for these as substituting for language courses.
5. The list of approved optional courses from other
departments shall be determined and published as
appropriate from time to time.
6. Assessment
Assessment shall normally include course assessment
as provided for in General Regulations, including
essays, tests, presentations, project assignments,
group exercises, practical exercises, and other forms of
assessment appropriate to the particular course, and
final examinations, but the assessment requirements
may vary between courses according to the approved
course prescriptions.
7. Progression
In order to proceed from one semester to the next,
a student must obtain a cumulative GPA, which is in
accordance with General Regulation 00.9.
8. Award in Chinese Studies Bachelor of Arts Degree:
To graduate as Bachelor of Arts in Chinese Studies,
students must qualify for a BA under the General
Regulations of the Faculty of Humanities, and satisfy the
requirements for the Major in Chinese Studies.
To graduate with a Major in Chinese Studies, a student
shall be required to obtain 125 credits.

DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH

Departmental Regulations
Subject to the provisions of the Academic General
Regulations and the Faculty of Humanities Special
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply:
Programmes and Titles of Degrees
The Department of English offers the following
programmes leading to the award of a Degree:
a) Single Major Programme, leading to the award
of a Bachelor of Arts Degree as per Departmental
Regulations;
b) Combined Major/Minor Programme with English as
the Major, leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts
Degree as per Departmental Regulations;
c) Combined Major/Major Programme with English
and a second subject other than English as Majors,
leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts Degree as
per Departmental Regulations;
d) Combined Major/Minor with English as the Minor,
leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts Degree
as per Departmental Regulations, if the student is
registered in the Faculty of Humanities;
e) Multi-disciplinary Programme, leading to the award
of a Bachelor of Arts Degree as per Departmental
Regulations.
Entry Requirements
Admission requirements to the Programmes in the
Department of English are specified in the Faculty of
Humanities Regulation 22.2.

1.5.2 Training in English studies provides the recipient
with the kind of adaptable mind that enables
him/her to fit, with some additional training, into
a wide range of managerial and administrative
positions, including posts in financial and business
institutions.
Course Structure
1.6.1 Courses in the Department of English shall be
offered at Levels 100 to 400 for the undergraduate
programmes as outlined below.
1.6.2 In addition to the Department’s courses, an
undergraduate candidate majoring in English
shall take General Education Courses (GECs) and
electives in accordance with General Regulation
00.2124.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
ENG121 Introduction to English Language Description
and Usage (3)
This course provides an overview of basic grammatical
concepts and terms that students can apply to particular
examples and difficulties of usage.

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Course
Band A: Language
ENG211 The Pronunciation of English (3)
This course introduces students to articulatory processes
and the description of English sounds.
Optional Courses
Band B: English Literature
ENG212 Introduction to English Literature: The Novel (3)
This course introduces students to the development of
the English Novel from its infancy in the 18th Century
to modern times. The course broadly examines the
emergence of the English Novel and the conditions
under which it emerged.
Band C: African Literature
ENG213 Prose Literature of Southern Africa (3)
This course introduces students to the prose literature of
the Southern African region, covering various historical,
political and social topics as they are written about in
the literature of the region.
ENG223 The Drama of Southern Africa (3)
This course introduces students to the drama of
Southern Africa, covering the genesis and development
of Southern African drama, identifying a dramatic form
that is Southern African, and relating, comparing and
contrasting such a dramatic form to those from other
parts of Africa.
Semester 4
Core Course
Band A: Language
ENG221 Introduction to English Linguistics (3)
This course is an introductory over-view of Descriptive
Linguistics, viewed as a foundation for the study of
English Language and Linguistics courses.
Optional Courses

ENG113 Introduction to Literature: Prose (3)
This course is designed to introduce first-year students
to the literary aspects of the essay and (auto) biography,
and to the structure and components of the novel and
short story.
General Education Courses
COM111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT111
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 		
(2) CORE
Semester 2
Core Courses
ENG131 Writing in English (3)
This course familiarises students with various rhetorical
principles and examines various features of discourse
types specific to particular genres.
ENG123 Introduction to Literature: Drama and Poetry
(3)
This course introduces students to the literary and
theatrical aspects of drama, and to the structure and
literary strategies of poetry.
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 		
(2) CORE

Award of Degree
A student must satisfy the appropriate provisions of

120

Band B: English Literature
ENG222 Introduction to English Literature: Poetry and
Drama (3)
This course introduces students to some of the major
poets and dramatists in English Literature. It examines
the works of some of the major poets and dramatists in
English Literature from Chaucer up to the present time.
Band C: African Literature
ENG233 The Poetry of Southern Africa (3)
This course introduces students to the poetry of Southern
Africa. While focusing on the modern written forms, it
also points to the living, everyday experience of oral
traditions of poetry. The course is broadly representative
of the countries, themes and forms of poetic expression
in the region.
Band G: Theatre Studies
ENG217 Theatre History (3)
This course introduces students to the study of Theatre
from a historical perspective. The course traces
developments in Theatre across the world, highlighting
the circumstances that have either helped develop or
stifle it.

Level 300
Semester 5
Core Course
Band A: Language
ENG351 Phonology of English (3)
This course introduces students to some of the
phonological theories on the pronunciation of English
and other languages known to them. In addition, it
gives students the opportunity to apply this knowledge
to some data to enhance their understanding of the
theories.
Optional Courses
Band A: Language
ENG341 Introduction to Sociolinguistics (3)
This course introduces students to the relationship
between language and society. It focuses in particular
on the description of varieties of English and their use in
various contexts, and on the analysis of and solutions to
language problems, especially in developing countries.
ENG441 Introduction to Pragmatics (3)
This course introduces students to Pragmatics, a
discipline which studies various factors involved in
the appropriate use and understanding of language.
It looks at factors such as the speaker’s intentions and
how they are surmised by the addressee, the speaker’s
and addressee’s background attitudes and beliefs, their
understanding of the context in which the utterance
is made, and their knowledge of how language can be
used for a variety of purposes.
Band B: English Literature
ENG352 The Metaphysical Poets (3)
This course charts the development of Metaphysical
poetry during the 16th-17th Centuries through its chief
practitioners: Donne, Herbert, Vaughan and Marvell.
It studies poetic devices, styles and subjects that link
together these writers as Metaphysical poets.
ENG332 English Romantic Poetry: The Early Romantics(3)
This course deals with the early part of the literature that
came to be known as English Romantic Poetry. Focus is
on Blake, Wordsworth and Coleridge.
ENG342 Elizabethan and Jacobean Literature: Drama (3)
This course is a study of Elizabethan and Jacobean drama
as a significant literary, cultural, political and religious
expression of the age.
ENG412 Introduction to Shakespeare (3)
This course deals with the achievement of Shakespeare
as the hallmark of the English literary tradition through
an exploration of three of his more famous plays and a
selection of his most popular poems.
Band C: African Literature
ENG333 Critical Issues in Modern African Literature:
Phases of Modern African Literature (3)
This course is an examination of the major critical issues
and trends in Modern African literature using both
creative materials and critical works of African authors.
ENG353 Currents of Thought in the Literature of the
African Diaspora: African-American Literature (3)
This course is a survey of African-American literature
from slave narratives to contemporary works.
ENG363 Oral Literature (3)
This course acquaints students with orality as a cultural
process. It develops an appreciation of verbal art and
examines the fundamental sources and bases of the
forms and structures of African and European literature.

ENG373 Botswana Literature (3)
This course is a critical study of the novel, poetry,
short story and drama of Botswana. It also traces the
development of the literature. The course focuses
on stylistic, thematic and generic differences and
similarities in the works.
Band D: World Literature
ENG334 Commonwealth Literature (3)
This course studies a selection of works of prose, fiction,
drama, poetry and essays drawn from a number of
literary traditions in The Commonwealth. The choice
of texts for study will help students to reflect on the
problematic use of the English language as a medium of
literary expression in all Commonwealth societies.
Band E: Theory
ENG415 Readings in Literary Theory 1 (3)
This course surveys the changing conceptions of the
nature and function of literature in the Western
tradition, from Plato and Aristotle in the Classical period
to Tolstoy and Marx in the nineteenth century.
Band G: Theatre Studies
ENG317 African Drama (3)
This course offers students an opportunity to critically
look at a representative selection of African dramatic
literature. The course helps students to identify and
appreciate the various themes explored in drama, its
various styles and techniques and its role in society.
ENG327 Practical Theatre (6, 2 Semesters)
This course is an introduction to the practice of theatre.
It involves such processes as script analysis, research,
rehearsal, stagecraft and performance. The course offers
students an opportunity to approach theatre holistically
and to understand the relationships between the various
arts that go into its making.
Semester 6
Core Course
Band A: Language
ENG311 Modern English Grammar (3)
This course is a detailed description and analysis of
modern English grammar: the meaning of grammar,
English word classes, phrase types and sentence
structure.
Optional Courses
Band A: Language
ENG321 Usage in English (3)
This course examines common problems associated
with word class usage (noun/pronoun agreement,
tense and voice in verbs, comparative and superlative
forms in adjectives and adverbs) and sentence usage,
including modification, coordination, subordination and
fragmentation.
ENG361 Morphology of English (3)
This course provides students with an understanding of
the morphological structure of English and their own
languages. It also teaches students how to analyse any
language morphologically.
Band B: English Literature
ENG312 Milton (3)
This course is a detailed study of the seminal poetical
writings of John Milton. It places Milton in the context
of the tradition of world Epic poetry and of English
17th Century poetry, and systematically explores
Miltonic ideas about literary genre, politics, religion and
philosophy.
ENG362 English Romantic Poetry: The Later Romantics
(3)
This course attempts to establish the relationship

121

between the Early Romantics and the Later Romantics
in terms of theme and style. Focusing on Keats, Shelley
and Byron, it attempts to place the Later Romantics in
their proper literary and socio-political context.
ENG372 Elizabethan and Jacobean Poetry (3)
This course examines how Elizabethan and Jacobean
writers employed the poetic mode to express views on
private and personal feelings, and on social and public
issues.
Band C: African Literature
ENG383 Critical Issues in Modern African Literature:
Critical Debates in African Literature (3)
This course continues the discussion of the major issues
and trends in Modern African Literature using both
creative works and critical writings of African authors.
ENG343 Modern African Poetry (3)
This course deals with the modes, styles and themes
of modern African poetry, and the socio-political and
cultural influences that have shaped it. The traditions
of modern African poetry are studied across periods and
regions.
ENG393 Currents of Thought in the Literature of the
African Diaspora: African-Caribbean Literature (3)
This course is a critical study of Caribbean literature
within the context of the forces and conditions that
occasioned its advent, and continue to impact its
survival and future.
Band D: World Literature
ENG324 Twentieth Century American Literature (3)
This course is a critical examination of twentieth-century
American literature using representative texts of various
genres/types: fiction, drama and poetry.
Band G: Theatre Studies
ENG327 Practical Drama (6, 2 Semesters)
This course is an introduction to the practice of theatre.
It involves such processes as script analysis, research,
rehearsal, stagecraft and performance. The course
offers students an opportunity to approach theatre
holistically and to understand the relationships between
the various arts that go into its making.
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Course
Band A: Language
ENG421 Approaches to Syntax (3)
This course provides students with the knowledge of
various approaches to syntax with specific emphasis on
functional approaches.
Optional Courses
Band A: Language
ENG331 Language Acquisition (3)
This course introduces students to the principles that
govern how humans acquire a first language, and
a second and/or an additional language. Important
aspects of the course include the role of the brain
and other speech organs in language acquisition and
processing, and learner strategies in Second Language
Acquisition.
ENG471 Introduction to Literary Stylistics (3)
This course introduces students to a range of linguistic
theories on which they will draw in their analysis of
selected literary texts.

Band B: English Literature
ENG422 The Development of the English Novel: The Early
English Novel (3)
This course is a chronological study of the development
of the English Novel from its 18th Century inception by
Defoe through to Romantic conceptions of the form.
It considers the novel’s evolution as a form of social
commentary and its response to diverse social and
political pressures.
ENG432 Victorian Poetry (3)
This course is a study of 19th Century English Victorian
poetry. It identifies the important themes and the
characteristic poetic features of the age. It considers
the Victorian concerns about death, love, religious faith,
marriage, the position of women and the great growth
and optimism of the age.
ENG442 Modern English Prose Fiction: 1900-1930 (3)
This course is an intensive study of a major work by
each of the following writers: Joseph Conrad, E.M.
Forster, D.H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf and James Joyce.
Students will explore and analyse the way these works
relate to the intellectual, cultural and social concerns
of the period.
ENG452 Shakespearean Drama (3)
This course considers a selection of Shakespearean tragic,
comedic and historical texts, as well as their cultural
setting, historical context and literary environment.
Band C: African Literature
ENG413 The African Novel 1 (3)
This course is a study of the African novel written in
English or translated into English from indigenous and
other languages of the continent of Africa. This study
concentrates on the characteristic themes and concerns
of the African novel.
ENG433 Introduction to Gender Issues (3)
This course combines theoretical and practical
approaches to literature in order to clarify how, and the
extent to which, feminist criticism can be applied to
analyse literary texts.
Band D: World Literature
ENG424 The Novel in the Modern World (3)
Focusing on major novels published since 1950, this
course provides an overview of how novelists from
different parts of the world have developed the form
as a means to address important social, cultural and
political issues.
Band F: Project/Long Essay
ENG416 Research Essay (6, 2 Semesters)
This course offers the student the opportunity to
conduct supervised research which should result in the
submission of an essay of 5000 - 7000 words.

Semester 8
Core Course
Band A: Language
ENG451 Introduction to Semantics (3)
This is an introductory course to Semantics which
promotes an understanding of a framework for
conceptualising meaning leading to clear and logical
thinking.
Optional Courses
Band A: Language
ENG411 Form, Function and Variation in English (3)
This course focuses on the practical analysis of texts
against a background of various theoretical approaches
to Stylistics.
ENG431 Introduction to Discourse Analysis (3)
This course introduces students to Discourse Analysis, a
discipline which is concerned with how language users
produce and interpret language in situated contexts and
how these constructions relate to social and cultural
norms, preferences, and expectations. Among other
things, the course focuses on the nature and structure
of written and spoken discourse and attempts to link
the characterization of speaker/writer meaning and its
explanation in the context of use.
ENG481 Language and Gender (3)
This course introduces students to a range of genderrelated theoretical and analytical issues in the structure
and use of English, and examines the current trends in
gender-related language reform.
Band B: English Literature
ENG462 Shakespearean Poetry (3)
This course explores a selection of Shakespeare’s Sonnets
and excerpts from the longer poems, focusing on major
themes of Elizabethan poetry such as love, time, death,
religion and politics.
ENG472 The Development of the English Novel: The
Victorian English Novel (3)
This course is a chronological study of the traditional
English novel from the Romantic Movement to the end
of the reign of Queen Victoria. The problems the novel
addresses include the decline in religious faith due to
Darwinism, and the social pressures of the increase of
urbanisation and industrialisation.

nationalist politics and literature, visual representations
of female and male sexuality, mainstream feminist
criticism and “womanism”.
ENG453 Bessie Head (3)
This course focuses on Bessie Head as one of the major
writers to emerge from Botswana and Africa.
Band D: World Literature
ENG434 Non-European World Literature (3)
This course provides an overview of the literatures of
unfamiliar cultures, covering topics such as classical
Asian poetry, the novel in China and Japan, magical
realism in Latin America, identity and social status
in multi-ethnic and multi-lingual societies and the
problem of translation.
Band E: Theory
ENG435 Readings in Literary Theory II (3)
This course surveys the various and sometimes
conflicting twentieth-century approaches to literature
from Russian Formalism to the more recent Feminist
and Postcolonial arguments.
ENG425 Seminar on Feminist Literary Theory (3)
Although this course demands an in-depth reading
of feminist theory, emphasis is also placed on
interdisciplinary approaches. Students are encouraged
to consider how theoretical statements affect their own
thinking and ideologies.
Band F: Project/Long Essay
ENG416 Project/Essay in either Language or Literature (6,
2 Semesters)
This course offers the student the opportunity to
conduct supervised research which should result in the
submission of an essay of 5000 - 7000 words.
Band G: Theatre Studies
ENG417 Theory and Practice of Drama
(6, 2 Semesters)
This is a course designed for students with an interest
in the practice of theatre. It is intended to deepen
students’ practical theatre skills and some important
theories underlying the skills of acting, directing for the
stage, set design, lighting, and script-writing.

ENG482 Modern English Drama (3)
This course is an exploration of the stylistic and
thematic advances made by British playwrights at the
beginning of the 20th century and their imprint on the
development of drama during the rest of the century.

General Education Courses
GEC268 Literature of Liberation (2)
This course covers creative work, biographies,
autobiographies and other digestible historical and
social texts that relate to the liberation of Africa and of
all the peoples of African descent.

ENG492 Modern English Poetry (3)
This course studies the poetry of Hopkins, W.B. Yeats, T.S.
Eliot and the poetry of WW1. The poetry explores the
material and spiritual dislocations that were signs of the
break-up of Western Civilisation.

Programme Structure
1.7.1 In each semester at Level 100 English shall comprise
6 credits made up of 1 core course in Language (3
credits) and 1 core course in Literature (3 credits).

Band G: Theatre Studies
ENG417 Theory and Practice of Drama (6, 2 Semesters)
This is a course designed for students with an interest
in the practice of theatre. It is intended to deepen
students’ practical theatre skills and some important
theories underlying the skills of acting, directing for the
stage, set design, lighting, and script-writing.

Band C: African Literature
ENG443 The African Novel II (3)
This course is a study of the design and technical
innovations to be seen in the African novel written in
English or translated into English from indigenous and
other languages of the continent of Africa.

ENG427 Dramatic Literature (3)
This course explores the importance of play texts in the
development of theatre traditions around the world. It
is designed to help students appreciate the difference
between drama as literature and drama as theatre.

ENG463 Gender Issues in African Literature (3)
Requiring a comprehensive reading of feminist theory
and some literary texts, this course encourages
students to draw on different disciplines to explore
representations of motherhood and fatherhood in

122

1.7.2 In each semester at Level 200 English shall comprise
6 credits made up of the following:
a)
A core course in Language, and
b)
A Literature course selected from the
available options.
1.7.3 In a Combined Degree (Major/Major)
Programme, English shall comprise the following at
Level 300: In each semester, 6 credits made up of
the core Language course and one Literature course
selected from any of the bands.
1.7.4 In a Combined Degree (Major/Major) Programme,

English shall comprise the following at Level
400: In each semester, 6 credits made up of the
core Language course and one Literature course
selected from any of the bands.
1.7.5 In a Combined Degree (Major/Minor) Programme,
where English is the Major subject, English shall
comprise the following at Level 300:
a) In each semester, 9 credits made up of the core
Language course, one Literature course, and
either another Language course or another
Literature course from a different band;
b) Over the two semesters, a student may only take
a maximum of 9 credits in Language.
1.7.6 In a Combined Degree (Major/Minor) Programme,
where English is the Major subject, English shall
comprise the following at Level 400:
a) In each semester, 9 credits made up of the
core Language course, one Literature course
and another Language or another Literature
course, provided it is from a different band;
b) Over the two semesters, a student may only
take a maximum 9 credits in Language.
1.7.7 In a Combined Degree (Major/ Minor) where
English is the Minor subject at Level 300: In each
semester English shall comprise 3 credits selected
in consultation with the Head of Department from
the Department’s course offerings from Level 300
and above.
1.7.8 In a Combined Degree (Major/Minor) where
English is the Minor subject at Level 400: In each
semester, English shall comprise 3 credits selected
in consultation with the Head of Department from
the Department’s course offerings from Level 300
and above.
1.7.9 In a Single Major Programme at Level 300, English
shall comprise the following in each semester: 15
credits made up of:
a) The core Language course, one optional
Language course, two Literature courses
selected from different bands and another
Language or Literature course also from a
different band.
b) Over the two semesters, a student must take at
least 12 credits, the equivalent of 4 courses, in
Language.
1.7.10 In a Single Major Programme at Level 400: In each
semester, English shall comprise 15 credits made
up of the following:
a)
A core Language course;
b)
One optional Language course;
c)
Two optional Literature courses provided
that each course is from a different band;
d)
A project or long essay in either Language
or
Literature (6 credits over two semesters).
1.7.11 In a Multidisciplinary Programme at Levels 300
and 400, the student shall, in consultation with
his/her tutor and the Head of Department, select
for credit relevant courses from the Departmental
offerings. Such courses shall normally be at Level
300 and above.
Assessment and Examination
Student performance in each course shall be evaluated
by taking into account continuous assessment and final
examination, except in the case of ENG416: Research
Essay, where the completed essay will take the place of
a final examination.

Progression from Semester to Semester
In order to proceed from one semester to the next, a
student must maintain a cumulative GPA in accordance
with General Regulation 00.9.

DEPARTMENT OF FRENCH
GENERAL INFORMATION
Why choosing to study French?
French is one of the most widely used languages in
the world, spoken in Europe, Africa, North and South
America, and parts of Asia and the Pacific. It is, with
English and Arabic, one of the three most widely spoken
languages on the African continent, used in more
than twenty countries from Morocco to Madagascar.
French is a major medium of international business and
diplomacy. The literature and culture of France and the
French-speaking world comprise a major international
civilisation several centuries old. French language
novels, poems, cinema, music, and journalism play an
influential role in contemporary life. Degree students
in the French Department learn to speak and read the
language with a high level of fluency, as well as gaining
a familiarity with the culture of the French-speaking
world.
Degree in French offered at UB.
The French Department offers a four-year Bachelor of
Arts programme that includes courses in both language
and literature and civilisation. Students who have
already studied French in secondary school may be
permitted to begin the program at a higher level. Many
students continue after completion of the programme
to obtain the Post-graduate Degree in Education in
order to teach in secondary schools.
Who would be interested in this programme?
Students who wish to speak other languages, who enjoy
literature and cultural studies, or who are interested in
international affairs and travel will find the programme
rewarding.
What courses will be taken?
Students take a core curriculum of language and
literature courses that enable them to speak, read, and
comprehend French with a high level of competency. In
addition, a broad array of optional courses enables them
to choose the particular aspects of the field on which
they wish to concentrate. These courses include topics
in literature and philosophy, contemporary life and
civilisation, linguistics, and French for specific purposes
such as business, tourism, diplomacy, or translation.
What are the career opportunities?
The ability to speak another of the worlds’ most widely
used languages opens many opportunities to students.
Besides the chance to teach French in secondary
schools or at the University level, French majors have
the possibility to work in government, international
business and commerce, tourism, journalism, and
international law. You may choose to work in some
Advertising agencies as an advertiser, a Copy writer.
Other opportunities include working as Guide, Hostess,
Hotel or Catering Administrator, Information Officer,
Interpreter, Translator, Journalist or archivist, Private
Secretary or Private Tutor.
ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
Only candidates who passed FRENCH in the Botswana
General Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE) or
its equivalent may be admitted to Level 100 Group A
ADVANCED.

123

Candidates without the above requirements may be
admitted to Level 100 Group B BEGINNERS.
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE
Combined Major Degree Programme
In a combined major Degree Programme, a student may
take the following:
Semester 1
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels
100(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core
courses at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Level 100 (Group A advanced)
and two optional courses at Levels 200, 300 and 400.
One of these optional courses shall be selected from the
prescribed courses offered by other Departments in the
Faculty of Humanities; At least one elective at Levels 100,
200, 300, and 400, which may be taken from another
department, depending on the students’ professional
needs;
Semester 2
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels 100
(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core courses
at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Level 100 (Group A advanced)
and two optional courses at Levels 200, 300 and 400.
One of these optional courses shall be selected from the
prescribed courses offered by other Departments in the
Faculty of Humanities;
At least one elective at Levels 100, 200, 300 and
400 which may be taken from another department,
depending on the students’ professional needs;
To be awarded a Bachelor of Arts Degree in a Combined
Major Programme, a student must have obtained 24
credits in the core courses and at least 28 credits in the
optional courses. The total number of credits must not
be less than 52.
Combined Major/Minor (Where French is the Major)
In a combined Degree programme, where French is the
Major, a student shall take the following:
Semester 1
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels
100 (Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core
courses at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Level 100 (Group A advanced),
two optional courses at Level 200 and three optional
courses at Levels 300 and 400. One of these optional
courses shall be selected from the prescribed courses
offered by other Departments in the Faculty of
Humanities;
At least one elective, which may be taken from
another department, depending on the students’
professional needs;
Semester 2
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels 100
(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core courses
at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Level 100 (Group A advanced), two
optional courses at Level 200 and three optional courses
at Levels 300 and 400. One of these optional courses
shall be selected from the prescribed courses offered by
other Departments in the Faculty of Humanities;
At least one elective at Levels 100, 200, 300 and
400 which may be taken from another department,
depending on the students’ professional needs;
To be awarded a Bachelor of Arts Degree in a Combined
Major Programme where French is a Major, a student
must have obtained 24 Credits from the core courses and
36 credits from the optional courses. The total number of
credits must not be less than 60.

Combined Minor/Major (Where French is the Minor)
In a combined degree programme, where French is the
Minor, a student shall take the following:
Semester 1
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels 100
(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core courses
at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at levels 100(Group A Advanced) to
400; At least one elective, which shall be taken from the
Major subject;
Semester 2
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels
100(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core
courses at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Levels 100 (Group A Advanced) to
400 provided that no optional course has been taken in
the first semester;
At least one elective, which shall be taken from the
Major subject;
A student shall normally take a total of up to three
courses in French in Two semesters (one core course
each semester and one optional course in two semesters),
giving him/her up to 8 credits.
To be awarded a Bachelor of Arts Degree in a Combined
Programme where French is the Minor, student must
have obtained 24 credits from the core courses and
at least 8 credits from the optional courses. The total
number of credits must not be less than 32.
Single Major
In a Single major degree Programme, a student shall take
the following courses:
Semester 1
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels 100
(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core courses
at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Level 100 (Group A advanced)
and two optional courses at Level 200; five optional
courses at Level 300, and six optional courses at Level
400. Two of these optional courses at Levels 300 and 400
shall be selected from the prescribed courses offered by
other Departments in the Faculty of Humanities.
At least one elective, which may be taken from another
department, depending on the students’ professional
needs;
Semester 2
All core courses as follows: one core course at Levels 100
(Group A Advanced), 200, 300 and 400; two core courses
at Level 100 (Group B Beginners);
One optional course at Level 100 (Group A advanced) and
two optional courses at Level 200; five optional courses
at Level 300, and six optional courses at Level 400. Two
of these optional courses at Levels 300 and 400 shall be
selected from the prescribed list of courses offered by
other Departments in the Faculty of Humanities.
At least one elective at Levels 100, 200, 300 and
400 which may be taken from another department,
depending on the students’ professional needs;
To be awarded a Bachelor of Arts Degree in a Single
Major Programme, a student must have obtained 24
credits from the core courses and 56 credits from the
optional courses. The total number of credits must not
be less than 80.
Multidisciplinary Combined degree Programme
In a Multidisciplinary Combined Degree Programme a
student shall take a number of core and optional courses
that will be determined by negotiation between him and
the French Department.

LIST OF COURSES AT EACH LEVEL
LEVEL 100
Group A. ADVANCED STUDENTS (Prerequisite: BGCSE in
French or equivalent)
Semester 1
Core course
FRE111
Practical French Language (3 credits)
Optional courses
FRE112
Spoken and Written French (2 credits)
FRE113
French for Specific purposes I (2 credits)
Semester 2
Core Course
FRE121
Communication skills in French 		
(3 credits)
Optional courses
FRE122
Techniques of oral and written expression
(2 credits)
FRE123
French for Specific purposes II (2 credits)
GROUP B. BEGINNERS (Prerequisite: none)
Semester 1
Core Courses (Students should register for both FRE114
and FRE115 which are compulsory)
FRE114 Basic French language (3)
FRE115 Oral and Written Comprehension (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses (Students should register for both FRE124
and FRE125 which are compulsory)
FRE124 Oral and Written Expression (3)
FRE125 Elementary French language (3)
LEVEL 200
Semester 3
Core Course
FRE211
Intermediate French Language (3): 		
Prerequisite FRE124 & FRE125 or equivalent.
Optional Courses
FRE212
Business, Scientific and Technical French (2)
FRE213
Introduction to French Literature (2)
FRE214
Introduction to the Culture and Civilization
of the French Speaking World (2)
Elective course
FRE217 French Language I (3)
Semester4
Core Course
FRE221
Advanced French Language (3) : Prerequisite
FRE211 or equivalent.
Optional Courses
FRE222
French for International relations, 		
Tourism and Hotel Industry (2)
FRE223
Introduction to African Literature in
French (2)
FRE224
Conversation (2)
Elective course
FRE227
French Language II (3) 			
Prerequisite: FRE217 or equivalent

Optional courses
FRE312
French Novel and Poetry of the 19th
Century (2)
FRE313
Introduction to French Linguistics (2)
FRE314
French Culture and Civilisation (2)
FRE315
Introduction to Text Analysis (2)
ALL341
Introduction to Literary Theory (3)
TRS391
African Philosophy and Culture (3)
ENG333 A Critical Issues in Modern African 		
Literature (3)
Elective course
FRE317
French for Tourism and Hospitality I (3)
Prerequisite FRE227 or equivalent
Semester 6
Core Course
FRE325
Advanced Communicative French (3):
Prerequisite FRE311
Optional Courses
FRE321
African and Caribbean Literature in
French (2)
FRE322
Culture and Civilization of French 		
Speaking African Countries (2)
FRE323
French Linguistics and Orthography (2)
FRE324
French Essay Writing (2)
ALL333
Introduction to Research methods (3)
ENG373 Botswana Literature (3)
ENG343 Modern African Poetry (3)
Elective course
FRE327
French for Tourism and Hospitality II (3)
Prerequisite: FRE317 or equivalent
LEVEL 400
Semester 7
Core Course
FRE411
French language in use (3): 		
Prerequisite FRE325
Optional Courses
FRE412
Currents of thought in the French 		
Speaking World (2)
FRE413
Theory of translation (2)
FRE414
Modern French Literature: Study of a
Genre, an Author (2)
FRE415
Research essay (2)
ENG431 Introduction to Discourse Analysis (3)
ALL451
Introduction to African Thought (3)
Semester 8
Core Course
FRE426 Advanced Communication skills in French
(3) ): Prerequisite FRE411
Optional Courses
FRE421
French Language Through Drama (2)
FRE422
Advanced French Linguistics (2)
FRE423
Translation (2)
FRE424
African Literature: study of a genre, an
author (2)
FRE425
Aspects of French thought (2)
FRE427
Caribbean Literature in French (2)
ENG 433 Introduction to gender issues (3)
ALL 442 Creative Writing, Theory & Practice (3)
FRENCH COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

LEVEL 300
Semester5
Core Course
FRE311
Proficiency in French Language (3) 		
: Prerequisite FRE221 or equivalent.

124

FRE111 Practical French Language (3)
This course will reinforce students’ competence in
oral and written French so that they have a more
spontaneous use of the French language. Emphasis
will be laid on mastering basic language functions and
linguistic structures learnt by students at secondary

level for effective expression in both written and verbal
French. It includes practical oral and written exercises in
the laboratory and in the classroom.
FRE112 Spoken and Written French (2)
This course aims at rapidly developing students’ fluency
and accuracy in spoken and written French by equipping
them with listening and reading skills and strategies. The
content of the course will cover practical exercises, both
oral and written, in the classroom and in the language
laboratory.
FRE113 French for Specific Purposes (2)
This French language course aims at equipping students
with reading techniques so as to understand and
interpret texts (documentation and bibliography) of
their area of specialization (economics, law and social
sciences) written in French. The content comprises
analysis and description of different types of French
discourse used in various disciplines offered to students
at this level.
FRE 114 Basic French Language (3)
This is an intensive French Language course intended to
develop students’ ability to communicate in French both
orally and in writing. Emphasis is placed on elementary
linguistic structures within speech acts at the same time
as free expression (spoken and written). Oral exercises
are done in the language laboratory to consolidate
communicative and linguistic competencies.
FRE 115 Oral and Written Comprehension (3)
The aim of this course is to develop students’
comprehension of spoken and written French by
equipping them with some reading techniques
(skimming, scanning, etc.) and listening strategies and
strengthening their ability to express ideas in French
by means of both oral and written speech. The course
will be based on oral and written comprehension of
descriptive and narrative passages for essay writing.
FRE 121 Communication Skills in French (3)
This course aims at developing learners’ ability to use
the French language efficiently in a practical way. It
incorporates language activities related to all four skills
ñ reading, writing, listening, and speaking - that will
enable learners to understand and communicate in the
spoken and written language.
FRE 122 Techniques of Oral and Written Expression (2)
The aim of this course is to develop students’ fluency
and accuracy in spoken and written French. Students
will be trained to introduce nuances in their oral
expression through some communicative activities
(free speech, discussions, class presentations, role play,
simulation etc.) Emphasis will be placed on techniques
and strategies relevant to the planning and organization
of writing tasks (writing reports, summaries, formal and
informal letters, expressing opinions, etc.)
FRE123 French for Specific Purposes II (2)
This French language course aims at equipping students
with reading techniques so as to understand and
interpret texts (documentation and bibliography) of their
area of specialization (Library and information studies,
History etc.) written in French. The content comprises
analysis and description of different types of the French
discourse used in various disciplines. Emphasis is laid
on the accuracy of the vocabulary used in those nonstandard situations of communication.
FRE 124 Oral and Written Expression (3) (Register for
both FRE124 and FRE125 )
This course aims at helping students use acquired

communication skills so as to express themselves
freely in accurate spoken as well as written French.
Communication activities will be performed in both
spoken and written French in order to give students selfconfidence in the use of the French language.
FRE 125 Elementary French Language (2) (Register for
both FRE125 and FRE124)
This course will develop student’s communicative skills
which have already been covered and introduce new
speech acts and grammar structures, and building up
vocabulary on new topics in order for them to achieve
proficiency in spoken and written French. The content
includes the consolidation of language functions
and grammatical structures already acquired and the
introduction of new ones.
FRE 211 Intermediate French Language (3) Prerequisite
(FRE124 & FRE125)
This course aims at consolidating communicative
fluency and grammatical accuracy in order to help
students achieve proficiency in spoken French. Students
will acquire useful oral and writing skills for setting
up efficient communication in French within standard
situations. Focus will be placed on the study of new
language forms and functions. Classroom activities
comprise oral and written exercises.
FRE 212 Business, Scientific, and Technical French (2)
This course aims at giving students an opportunity
to learn the French language that can be used in a
professional situation of communication. It includes
study of language mechanisms and structures necessary
for understanding scientific and technical texts written
in French or study of the common and important
commercial vocabulary related to the economic field.
Students will be required to choose one of the two
topics: Business French or Scientific and Technical
French.
FRE 213 Introduction to French Literature (2)
This course is offered to introduce students to a variety
of basic literary genres of specific authors from France:
novels, short stories, poems, of intermediate difficulty.
The main objective will be to introduce students to a
basic vocabulary of literary discourse in French, to make
them aware of literary style, to provide basic abilities
to communicate orally or in writing, and to generate in
them the desire to read.
FRE 214 Introduction to Culture and Civilisation of the
French Speaking World (2)
This course intends to examine aspects of the culture and
civilisation of the French-speaking world which are not
only relevant for the study of literature and language
but also are a real introduction to ways of life, social
organisation, law, politics, etc. A survey will be made of
the civilisation of French-speaking countries through
authentic materials based on economy, social life,
and politics. Students will be given an opportunity to
compare aspects of culture and civilization of the French
speaking world with their own culture.
FRE 217 French Language I (3) Elective. Prerequisite:
NONE
This course is designed to develop students’ competence
in spoken and written French so as they have a more
spontaneous use of the French language. Emphasis
will be laid on mastering basic language functions and
linguistic structures for effective expression in both
written and verbal French. The content of this course
will cover practical exercises both oral and written in the
classroom and in the Language Laboratory. The course

125

meets 6 Hours per week A substantial amount of time
is devoted to students private study in the resources
centre: language Laboratory, Library and Video Library.
FRE221 Advanced French Language (2) Prerequisite:
FRE211
This course aims at helping students to express
themselves as clearly as possible with more confidence
and accuracy. Emphasis is on exercises reflecting real
life language use and leading to better pronunciation
and grammatical control. It is based on oral and written
exercises aimed at broadening vocabulary and improving
style. Composition will be done on the following areas:
description (to evoke places), portrait (to evoke people
with their emotions and sentiments), and narration.
FRE222 French for International Relations or Tourism
and Hotel Industry (2)
This course aims at giving students an opportunity
to learn the French language that can be used in a
professional situation of communication. It consists
of study of vocabulary and savoir-faire related to
international relations or to the tourism profession and
the hotel trade. Students will be required to choose one
of the following two topics: French for International
Relations or French for Tourism, and Hotel Industry.
FRE223 Introduction to African Literature (2)
This course is offered to introduce students to a
variety of basic literary genres of specific authors from
Francophone Africa: novels, short stories, poems, of
intermediate difficulty. The main objective will be to
introduce students to a basic vocabulary of literary
discourse in French, make them aware of literary style,
to provide basic abilities to communicate orally or in
writing and to generate in them the desire to read.
FRE 224 Conversation (2)
This course aims at developing students’ ability to
understand and produce general notions (basic concepts)
and helping them improve their command of spoken
French. Realistic documents as well as communicative
activities will be used to strengthen students’ ability to
communicate in French. Conversation from a topic, a
text, a film, a documentary, a song, a poem and slides
will lead to written exercises.
FRE 227 French Language II 3) Elective. Prerequisite:
FRE217
This course is a follow up to FRE117. It aims at developing
learners’ ability to use the French language efficiently
in a practical way. It incorporates more advanced
language structures and functions with emphasis on
conversational skills. There will be language activities
related to all four skills –reading, writing, listening and
speaking- that will enable learners to understand and
communicate in the spoken and written language for
practical purposes. The course meets 6 Hours per week.
A substantial amount of time is devoted to students
private study in the resources Centre: language
Laboratory, Library and Video Library. Thorough
preparation to write the Paris Chamber of Commerce
and Industries Hotel and Tourism Industry French exam.
FRE311 Proficiency in French Language (2)
This course aims at helping students achieve proficiency
in spoken French and improve their written language
skills. Students will obtain a deeper knowledge of the
structure and functioning of the French language in
order to write and speak better in French.
FRE312 French Novel and Poetry of the 19th Century (2)
The aim of this course is to introduce students to the

major schools and movements of French literature
through the works of some of the leading writers of the
French tradition and to familiarise them with particular
expressions and stylistic features used by selected
authors in their works. Students will become familiar
with major writers and schools of the French tradition
and through them improve their language skills and
familiarity with French culture. Students will read major
works of French literature from selected movements of
the 19th century.
FRE313 Introduction to French Linguistics (2)
This course will provide a general knowledge base for
scientific study of the French language and equip
students with facts and skills to enable them to describe
the French language and account for its internal
changes. The course will entail an elaborate description
of the following linguistic areas: phonetics, phonology/
morphology, semantics, and syntax of French.
FRE314 French Culture & Civilisation (2)
This course examines aspects of French culture and
civilisation which are relevant for the study of literature
and language and constitute an introduction to ways
of life, social organisation, law, politics, attitudes and
mentalities, etc. Students will learn to appreciate better
the civilisation of France and be able to pursue studies
of French language and literature. Study of texts will be
extracted from newspapers, journals, as well as television
programs, movies, etc., to gain a basic familiarity with
the culture and civilisation of France.
FRE315 Introduction to Text Analysis (2)
This course intends to give students a basic familiarity
with the genres of literature in French and with different
ways of approaching texts: thematic studies, use of
language, relationship between form and content,
characterization, and to familiarize them with the
vocabulary used in French literary studies. Students will
study some schools and methods of literary criticism
in order to enable them to read and appreciate more
complex and demanding works of literature.
FRE317 French for Tourism & Hospitality I (3) Elective.
Prerequisite: FRE227
The aim of this course is to help students acquire a
basic knowledge of general French language applied
to the fields of Hotel and Tourism industry. It consists
of study of vocabulary and savoir faire related to the
tourism profession and the hotel trade. This topicbased language course will cover real life contexts and
situations. Focus is on oral and written communication
related to the situations and practices in the area of
Hotel and Tourism management. The course will also
examine aspects of the culture and civilization of
the French speaking world. The course meets 5 Hours
per week. A substantial amount of time is devoted to
students’ private study in the resources Centre: language
Laboratory, Library and Video Library.
FRE321 African & Caribbean Literature in French (2)
This course aims to introduce students to the main
currents in Black African and Caribbean Francophone
literature and to familiarise them with the history,
culture, experiences, and aspirations of Black African
People and people of African descent in the Caribbean
through the study of selected works of prose and poetry
by major writers.
FRE322 Culture & Civilisation of French Speaking African
Countries (2)
The aims at giving students an opportunity to gain a
basic familiarity with the Civilisation of French-speaking
Black Africa and the ability to understand better their

own Culture by a comparison of the two.
FRE323 French Linguistics and Orthography (2)
This course introduces students to the fundamental basis
of the study of the French language and the application
of scientific knowledge of the French language to the
understanding of transcription and the writing systems
of the language
FRE324 French Essay Writing (2)
The course aims at improving students’ performance and
competence in objective reading and writing. Students
will learn and put into practice reading and writing
techniques.
FRE 325 Advanced Communicative French (3)
The aim of this course is to help students use acquired
communication skills so as to express themselves freely
and accurately in spoken and written French. The course
content will cover practical exercises that will help
learners to use French in simulated communicative
situations.
FRE327 French for Tourism & Hospitality II (3) Elective.
Prerequisite: FRE317
This course aims at reinforcing all basic grammar
structures and vocabulary acquired through language
functions in order to equip students with the necessary
oral and writing skills for setting up an efficient
communication in French within professional situations
linked to Tourism and the Hotel Industry. The course
meets 5 Hours per week. A substantial amount of time
is devoted to students private study in the resources
Centre: language Laboratory, Library and Video Library.
FRE411 French Language in use (3)
The aim of this course is to develop particular
communicative skills and strategies and to carry out
some communicative activities as well as to familiarise
students with the grammatical, stylistic, and linguistic
problems in spoken versus written French.
FRE412 Currents of Thought in the French-Speaking
Africa (2)
The aim of this course is to familiarise students with
current of thought in French-speaking African and
Caribbean countries. It consists of study of selected
philosophers and thinkers in Africa and the Caribbean:
S. Senghor, A. CÈsaire, F. Fanon, J. Roumain, J.
Rabemananjara, S. Adotevi, V.Y. Mudimbe, A. Memmi etc.
FRE413 Theory of Translation (2)
This course provides students with skills to handle
translation problems between French and English
(Setswana) and vice versa as well as an overview of
theoretical problems of translation. It will also examine
the role played by vocabulary, structure and meaning
in the theory of translation from French to English and
vice versa.
FRE414 Modern French Literature: Study of a genre or
an author (2)
The aim of this course is to give students more indepth knowledge of a particular author, genre, literary
movement, or subject in modern French literature.
Students will read several works of the chosen author,
genre, or subject.
FRE415 Research Essay (2)
The aim is to provide students with the opportunity to
conduct research and use their linguistic skills to write
on a chosen topic of linguistic, literary, or cultural
interest. Students will be trained in methods of pursuing
independent research and carry out such research under

126

staff supervision. Submission of a finished dissertation
of about 15 to 30 pages (3750 ñ 7500 words). Admission
to this course depends on the Departmental approval.
FRE421 French Language through Drama (2)
The aim of this course is to develop particular
communicative skills and strategies through the use
of some theatrical techniques. Students will have an
opportunity to learn the French language while writing
their own plots which they will be expected to perform
subsequently.
FRE422 Advanced French Linguistics (2)
The course aims to introduce students to the scientific
description of the French language with special
emphasis on the phonetics/phonology, morphology/
syntax and semantics.
FRE423 Translation (2)
This is a practical course that will give students skills to
handle the translation of French into accurate English
(and if possible into Setswana) and vice versa using
simple texts and writings, real life documents and
interpretation of speech.
FRE424 African Literature: Study of a genre or an author
(2)
This course seeks to give students more in-depth
knowledge of a particular author, genre, literary
movement, or subject in Francophone African literature.
Students will read several works of the selected author,
genre, or subject and gain an ability to apply what they
have learnt to their other studies.
FRE425 Aspects of French Thought (2)
This course will familiarise students with currents
of thought in France on social, economic, political,
and cultural problems, as well as their philosophical
underpinnings, as seen by influential French writers
since the 1930ís.
FRE426 Advanced Communication Skills in French (3)
This course aims at reinforcing students’ competence in
oral and written expression and comprehension so as to
give them more confidence in speaking and discussing a
variety of topics.
FRE427 Caribbean Literature in French (2)
The objective of this course is to introduce students to
the history, culture, experience, and aspirations of people
of African descent in the French speaking Caribbean. It
consists of study of selected period, theme, or piece of
work of an author.

DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY

The History Department offers degree programmes
in History and Archaeology. These two programmes
are separate entities.
Employment Opportunities.
(i) History provides a training in analytical skills and
training in research, writing, analysing text, problem
solving, and oral presentations. History graduates
from UB have entered a wide variety of professions,
including the civil service, education, business, the
media, the police, the BDF, and publishing, where
communication skills, research, problem-solving,
and independent thinking are valued.
(ii) Archaeologists are trained in field survey and
excavation, Archaeological Impact Assessment
required for new developments on underdeveloped
land, heritage management, GIS, and other technical

skills, as well as research and writing. In addition,
Archaeology develops general skills of a similar type
to those of History graduates (see above), which
they can apply in a wider range of professionals
including museum and ethnography.
General Provisions
Subject to the provisions of the Academic General
Regulations and the Faculty of Humanities Special
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply.
Offerings in any one semester:
The Department may not necessarily offer all courses
listed in any one semester.
Archaeology courses as part of History programmes:
ARC101, ARC102, ARC201 and ARC202 may be credited
as History optional courses. Other Archaeology courses
may with the permission of the History Department
be credited as History courses. However, in Major/
Major or Major/Minor degrees combining History and
Archaeology, Archaeology courses may not be credited
in History.

of a Bachelor of Arts Degree as per Departmental
Regulations;
b) Combined Major/Minor Programme with History as
the Major, leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts
Degree as per Departmental Regulations;
c) Combined Major/Major Programme with History
and a second subject other than History as Majors,
leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts Degree as
per Departmental Regulations;
d) Combined Major/Minor with History as the Minor,
leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts Degree
as per Departmental Regulations, if the student is
registered in the Faculty of Humanities;
e) Multidisciplinary degrees including History courses
may be approved in special cases. Such degrees lead
to the award of BA if the student is registered in the
Faculty of Humanities.
Entry Requirements
The normal Entry Requirements are as specified in
Faculty of Humanities Regulation 22.2.

Other courses as part of History programmes:
The History Department may in special circumstances
recognise and give credit for courses offered by other
departments as part of a History programme.

(A) Archaeology Course Descriptions
ARC101 Introduction to Archaeology
This course provides students with a basic understanding
of archaeological practice and human cultural
development, with a special focus on the archaeology of
the African continent
3 lecture hours per week.

Course codes:
Courses normally taught in the first semester are usually
indicated by odd-numbered course codes. Courses
normally taught in the second semester are usually
indicated by even-numbered course codes. Core courses
are usually indicated by 0 as the middle digit. However,
these are conventions for convenience and are not
binding.

ARC102 Introduction to World Prehistory
This course provides students with a basic understanding
of prehistory through a critical appraisal of concepts
of culture change and continuity in selected regions
of the world. Key concepts such as human evolution,
domestication, origins of agriculture and emergence
of complex societies are discussed. 3 lecture hours per
week.

Degree Programmes
The History Department offers the following programmes
leading to the award of a Degree:
(i) Bachelor of Arts in Archaeology
(ii) Bachelor of Arts in History

ARC201 Introduction to Archaeological Theory
The course presents to students Archaeological theories,
and analytical techniques generally employed in the
study of archaeological phenomena, and also discusses
the history of the discipline, its aims, goals, and
development as a discipline. 3 lecture hours per week.

Archaeology and History Majors: Note that Archaeology
and History may be taken as separate subjects
in any Major or Major/Minor combination, that is: Major/
Minor (Archaeology/History), Major/Major (Archaeology/
History), Major/Minor (History/Archaeology)
Archaeology:
a) Single Major Programme, leading to the award of a
Bachelor of Arts Degree as per Departmental
Regulations;
b) Combined Major/Minor Programme with Archaeology
as the Major, leading to the award of a Bachelor of
Arts Degree as per Departmental Regulations;
c) Combined Major/Major Programme with Archaeology
and a second subject other than Archaeology as
Majors, leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts
Degree as per Departmental Regulations;
d) Combined Major/Minor with Archaeology as the
Minor, leading to the award of a Bachelor of Arts
Degree as per Departmental Regulations, if the
student is registered in the Faculty of Humanities;
e) Multidisciplinary degrees including Archaeology
courses may be approved in special cases. Such
degrees lead to the award of BA if the student is
registered in the Faculty of Humanities.
History:
a) Single Major Programme, leading to the award

ARC202 Introduction to Archaeological Method
The course is an introduction to Archaeological research
methods, organisation, curation and interpretationincluding reconnaissance, environmental reconstruction,
excavation, principles of stratigraphy, and analysis of
finds. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC203 Introduction to African Archaeology
This course (i) introduces students to issues and
debates in African archaeology and its place in World
Archaeology; (ii) provide the students with an overview
of the earliest archaeological record of Africa, with
particular reference to sub-Saharan Africa; (iii) present
critical appraisal of approaches to culture change; (iv)
inculcate an ability to think and write critically about
interpretations that explain patterns in settlement and
material culture. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC204 Introduction to Environmental Archaeology
This course provides students with an understanding of
social and economic changes in prehistory, and helps to
reconstruct the interaction between people and their
environment. It provides theoretical background in
ecology, geology and related fields which are useful to
develop competence in understanding of archaeological
remains in the context of palaeo-environments. 3
lecture hours per week

127

ARC301 Archaeological Heritage Management
This course introduces students to key concepts in
archaeological theory and practice, and relates that to
the philosophy, policy and practice in Archaeological
Heritage management. It introduces students to the
history of heritage management and the activities that
characterized the growth of this sub-discipline, and how
it evolved to address issues of values, ethics and practices
employed by Heritage Practitioners and Archaeologists
in the protection, preservation and management of
heritage. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC302 Quantitative Techniques
This course equips students for working with
varied archaeological samples, and introduces basic
quantitative or statistical principles and techniques
applied in the field and laboratory practices as well as in
research data analysis. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC304 Research Project Proposal
This course is designed to equip students with skills to
develop research proposals as fulfilment for the courses
ARC 471(Field work and Preminary Report)and ARC
472(Research Project: Intermediate and Final Reports).
Introduced to research methods in archaeology through
ARC 323,the students are expected to apply the gained
knowledge and develop research proposals. 3 lecture
hour per week
ARC313 Stone Tools (Lithics)
This course introduces students to the basics of stone
tool technology and typology. This includes identification
and description of stone artifacts, principles of lithic
classification, drawing of illustrations and review of
regional and international lithic case studies. 3 lecture
hours
ARC 314 Ceramic Analysis
This course introduces students to the basics of ceramic
technology and style. It focuses on the following topics
of ceramics; stages of the manufacturing process,
ethno archaeology, archaeological pottery, cultural
transmission, ethno-linguistics affiliation, polity
membership and historical trajectories. 3 lecture hours
per week.
ARC315 Field Techniques
This course introduces students to basic archaeological
field skills such as map reading, orienteering, mapmaking, survey, excavation, sorting and cataloguing
finds. The course starts during the end of second year
winter break. During this period, students spend three
weeks doing intensive fieldwork under supervision and
are expected to write a field report. 3 lecture hours per
week.
ARC316 Archaeological Interpretation
The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with
aspects of Archaeological interpretation through a
series of real archaeological case studies and simulated
archaeological problems, with an emphasis on analysis
and interpretation. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC 317 Bioarchaeology I
The course provides students with skills for identification,
analysis and interpretation of faunal (archaeozoological)
material from archaeological deposits. Students are
expected to study the relationship between human
beings and their natural and social environments
through faunal remains. 3 lecture hours per week
ARC321 Ethnoarchaeology
This course introduces learners to basic concepts in
Ethnoarchaeology, the study of contemporary societies/

cultures and their relevance to archaeology. It focuses
on the principles and development of the sub-discipline.
3 lecture hours per week
ARC322 Computer Applications in Archaeology
Study of a subject of current research and debate and/
or topical issues in Botswana and Southern African
archaeology, based on current staff expertise currently
offered as Geographical Information Systems and
Archaeology. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC323 Research Methods in Archaeology
This course is an important component of methodological
discourse in archaeology and provides clear and practical
approaches to research design.
It equips students with basic knowledge and skills
to conceptualize plan and carry out archaeological
research and data analysis. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC401 Archaeology of Botswana
The course traces the archaeological record of Botswana
and highlights major cultural periods in the country.
It focuses on Botswana and its contribution to the
archaeology of southern Africa,
ARC 402 Advanced Archaeological Theory
This course focuses on the developments in archaeological
theory from the formation stages to the present. It will
also develop critical thinking and understanding of the
link between theory and method. It further considers
diverse disciplines that have developed and shaped
archaeological theories today. 3 lecture hours per week
ARC 412 Human Origins
This course presents the naturalists point of view of
evolution and human origins. It focuses on periods
dating from around 7 million years ago to about 10,000
years ago at the beginning of farming. It discusses
the origins of anatomically modern humans and their
spread around the world. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC 413 Complex Societies
This course examines why people turned to food
production after more than a million years of successful
hunting and gathering. Case studies cover food
production, sedentary life, human – environment
relations and uses case studies of complex societies in
the Near East, Africa and Central America. 3 lecture
hours per week.
ARC 417 Advanced Heritage Management
. The course aims to develop skills in heritage management
so that learners can be able to articulate the different
perspectives to heritage management focusing on
cultural heritage and environmental resources. At the
end of the course learners are expected to be able to
appreciate and differentiate various approaches to the
valuation of heritage, its development and management
of heritage and the role of heritage in development. It
is also offered as an elective to students from other
faculties especially targeting those in related disciplines
such as tourism. 3 lecture hours per week.
ARC 421 Geoarchaeology
The course focuses on spatial and temporal distributions
of archaeological sites, landscape topography,
geomorphology and subsurface stratigraphy, and site
context formation theory. Practical classes include
terrain unit evaluation and a compulsory five-day field
work (to the Makgadikgadi or the Shashe-Limpopo
Basin) during the mid-semester break. 3 lecture hours
per week.

ARC422 Bioarchaeology II
. This course focuses on the scientific study of human
skeletal remains, with special reference to demographic
profiling, paleo-pathology and others. 3 lecture hours
per week.

Semester 2
Core Courses
ARC202 Introduction to Archaeological Methods (3)
ARC204 Introduction to Environmental 		
Archaeology (3)

ARC471 Research Project: Fieldwork & Preliminary
Report. See HIS471. 3 Credits.
Upon acceptance of ARC 304 proposal by the History
Department Board, the student is allocated a supervisor
and is expected to conduct fieldwork during the winter
period. Before fieldwork commences, the course is
allocated a coordinator, who works closely with the
appointed supervisors to ensure success of the research.
The preliminary draft report is presented at a seminar
during Semester I, and the Board advises whether the
student proceeds to ARC 472. 3 credits

Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
ARC301 Archaeological Heritage Management (3)
ARC323 Research Methods in Archaeology (3)

ARC472 Research Project: Intermediate & Final
Report. See HIS472. 9 Credits
Upon acceptance of ARC 471 by the History Department
Board, the student proceeds with the preliminary
draft report and improves it (either by carrying more
fieldwork or archival work) into a draft dissertation that
is presented to the Board. Comments from the Board
are used to produce a dissertation submitted to the
Department at the end of semester. 9 credits.
Special Provisions for Courses ARC471 & ARC472:
Students shall be admitted to course ARC 471 at the end
of the preceding academic year, and spend the Long
Vacation undertaking independent research. Admission
to ARC471 is by permission of the Department of History.
Admission to ARC472 is dependent on successful
completion of ARC 471 and permission of the
Department of History.
Students shall make presentations to departmental
research seminars, and shall be assessed (i) principally,
on the basis of their Research Project; (ii) secondarily, on
the basis of their contribution to departmental research
seminars
General Education Courses:
GEC462 Reconstructing African Heritage through
Multimedia.
The course uses specially designed audiovisual
multimedia materials to study the major achievements
of African prehistory evidenced by the remains of
material cultures, the representation of material
heritage by archaeologists, and how African heritage
can be maintained and marketed. 2 lecture hours
Programme Structure
Requirements for Major and Minor Programmes in
Archaeology
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Course
ARC102
Introduction to World Prehistory (2)
Semester 2
Core Courses
ARC101
Introduction to Archaeology (2)
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
ARC201 Introduction to Archaeological Theory (3)
ARC203 Introduction to African Archaeology (3)

128

Semester 2
Core Courses
ARC302 Quantitative Techniques (3)
ARC304 Research Project Proposal (3) (core for
ARC315 Field Techniques (core for Single Majors
and Majors in Major/Minor combination
only) (3) credits
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
ARC401 Archaeology of Botswana (3)
ARC417 Heritage Management (3)
ARC471
Research Project Fieldwork & Preliminary
Report (3 credits, core for Single Major and Majors in
Major/minor combination only)
Semester 2
Core Courses
ARC402 Advanced Archaeological Theory (3)
ARC472 Research Project Intermediate & Final
Report
(9 credits, core for Single Major
and Majors in Major/minor combination)

History Course Descriptions
HIS102 Introduction to the Study of History
The course applies the skills and methods of university
historians to selected aspects of the history of
Botswana and neighbouring areas, raising questions of
individual identity, gender, class, language and ethnicity,
inheritance and heritage. 2 lecture hours per week.
HIS104 Debates in Botswana History
This course will introduce students to controversial
historical topics in Botswana’s past that require
examining evidence and critically analysing possible
interpretations. 2 lecture and discussion hours per week
HIS201 African Cultures & Civilisations to c.1500
Selected themes in prehistory, state formation, trade,
and small-scale societies from the origin and spread of
modern humans, via Ancient Egypt, Ethiopia and West
African kingdoms, to the rise and fall of Great Zimbabwe.
3 lecture hours per week.
HIS202 Africa in the Era of the Atlantic Slave Trade
C.1500-c.1800
From later Islamic and Christian history in North Africa,
via the growth of coastal and interior trading states,
slave trading in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, with
greater depth on south-eastern Africa. 3 lecture hours
per week.
HIS211 The Rise of Europe to World Dominance
The rise of Europe from the Middle Ages to its position
of world dominance in the late 19th century, including
religion, social and cultural change, science and
technology, witchcraft and deviance, and changing
relations with other civilizations. 3 lecture hours per
week.

HIS212 Catastrophe & Survival in 20th Century Europe
From world dominance to near self-destruction, and
then recovery; in three major cycles: the two world
wars; the era of Fascism; and the era of Communism;
including extremism, economic collapse and the Nazi
Holocaust. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS213 Poverty, Economic Growth and Affluence in
Western Europe and America
Examining the transformation of Western European and
American economies through the development of trade
in medieval Europe, feudal economies, markets during
the renaissance, and the industrialization of Western
Europe and North America. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS214 Agriculture and Industrialisation in the World
Economy to 1945
Comparing the rise of capitalism in Britain, France,
Germany, Russia and parts of southern and eastern
Europe, with Japan and North America: with emphasis
on agrarian transition, commercial revolutions, economic
crisis and recovery. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS305 Historical Research Methods & Historiography
of Botswana
Stages and processes in the research and writing
of history including topic selection, data collection,
evaluation, dating analysis and interpretation of
data, and systematic presentation of data as coherent
meaningful accounts of the past. Debates and research
lacunae on historical study of Botswana ecology
and environment, culture, family life, migration and
settlement, trade and production, technological change,
elite formation, labour relations, political institutions,
religion, education, etc. 4 lecture/ tutorial hours per
week.
HIS306 Introduction to the Philosophy of History &
Research Project Proposal
The course discusses the issues relating to the scientific
or non-scientific, objective or non-objective nature of
historical knowledge, and the various theories advanced
to explain the entire course of the human past. Each
individual student writes a Research Project proposal
for consideration by the History Department Board (prerequisite for entering HIS 471 Research Project course).
4 lecture/tutorial hours per week.
HIS331 African Diaspora in the Islamic World & Asia
In the context of the Saharan and Indian Ocean slave
trades, contrasting mining and plantation labour
with domestic labour and military employment in the
Mediterranean and the Near East, Arabia and Persia, and
the islands of the Oceans. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS332 African Diaspora in the Caribbean & the
Americas
Why Africans rather than natives became slaves,
African cultural survivals, slavery within mercantile
and industrial economies, debates about emancipation,
subsequent racial segregation, black political and
intellectual movements. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS333 Introduction to Foreign Policy, Diplomacy and
International Relations, 1800 to 1945
The concepts of diplomacy, foreign policy and
international relations, and their historical evolution;
operation of the international system and role of big
powers therein. 3 lecture hours per week.

role of the big powers and the survival of small states. 3
lecture hours per week.
HIS335 Colonial Latin America to 1830
Conquest and establishment of colonial rule by Spain
and Portugal; the indigenous people of Latin America,
impact of conquest, the establishment of colonial rule,
and anti-colonial struggles. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS416 Land, Labour & Liberation in Mozambique,
Namibia & Zimbabwe
Contrasting colonial conquests and heritages within the
context of South African regional domination, white
settler and company land and labour alienation; armed
liberation movements, post-colonial insurgence and
land reclamation. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS336 Modern Latin America
Independence and the failure of Pan Americanism;
military dictatorships to bureaucratic-authoritarianism;
revolutions in Mexico, Cuba and Nicaragua and the rise
of modern Latin American democratic states. 3 lecture
hours per week.

HIS421 Political Ideas during the Ancient and Medieval
Periods
Concepts and definitions, and the development of the
philosophy and theory of the State from the Ancient
to Medieval periods, to understand the origins and
historical background to later political thoughts, cultures
and theories. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS341 From Slavery to Colonialism in West Africa
Contact with Islam, growth of states, impact of slave
trade and Scramble, similarities and differences between
French and British colonial conquest and systems of rule
and changes within them. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS422 Political Ideas during the Modern and
Contemporary Periods
Further developments in the philosophy and theory of
the State and the organisation of societies. 3 lecture
hours per week.

HIS342 Modern Anglophone, Francophone & Lusophone
West Africa
Political and socio-economic changes since the outbreak
of the Second World War: late colonial constitutions;
early independence and popular betterment; militarybureaucratic coups; structural adjustment and
multiparty democracy. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS431 Natives & Settlers in Early North America
The dispossession of native North Americans by
European settlers between the Arctic and the Caribbean;
frontier penetration and settlement by free Europeans
and slave Africans, native-settler contact, and land
alienation through the 19th century. 3 lecture hours per
week.

HIS343 Trade & Politics in Central African Kingdoms
Socio-economic and political organization before
contact with Europeans, contact with Europeans and its
impact, imposition of colonial rule, and African reaction
to colonial policies up to the early 20th century. 3
lecture hours per week.

HIS432 Industrialisation & Expansion in Modern North
America
Themes from the American Revolution to the present
day: expansionism/ imperialism and isolationism;
extensive use of intensive agriculture; rapid development
of extractive and manufacturing industries; markets,
settlement and urbanisation; origins of the Information
Age. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS344 The Roots of Crisis in Modern Central Africa
Colonial administrations and settler economies,
resistance to colonialism, industrial workers, modern
forms of nationalism in Zambia and Malawi, armed
struggles in Angola and Congo; structural adjustment
and multiparty democratisation, SADC. 3 lecture hours
per week.
HIS401 Mfecane & the Settler Scramble for Southern
Africa
Historical debates on coastal frontiers in the 18th
century, interior states and Mfecane/ Difaqane wars,
settlers and missionaries; diamond and gold mining,
migrant labour; African states, Boer republics, British,
German and Portuguese colonies. 3 lecture hours per
week.
HIS412 Twentieth Century South Africa
Confrontations between white Afrikaner nationalism
and black African nationalism; racial segregation
and apartheid; worker resistance, native reserves and
ëBantustansí; liberation struggles up to 1994 and
achievements since then. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS414 Chiefs, Commoners & the Impact of Colonial
Rule in Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland
Forms of “parallel rule” through paramount chiefs;
economic and political relations with the South
Africa and Southern Rhodesia; contrasting political
development into kingdoms and a republic; postcolonial internal and regional developments. 3 lecture
hours per week.

HIS334 Superpowers in the 20th Century
Conceptual frameworks for analysing the international
system; main historiographical issues concerning the

129

HIS433 Civilization and Modernization in China & Japan
“This course aims to give students a basic knowledge and
understanding of Modernization in China and Japan
from ancient times to the present, introducing historical
controversies.” The description here seems to be entirely
about the modern period. Perhaps “Contrasting two
great civilizations both in their ancient history and in
their paths to modernization...”
HIS434 Ancient, Colonial & Independent India & South
Asia
Ancient civilisations, Muslim and early European coastal
trade; British colonial rule and transformations during
the colonial period; nationalism, independence and
partition; different trajectories of India, Pakistan, etc.
since independence. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS435 Modern Britain: Nation, Class, Gender, Race,
eligion, Culture, Power
Creation of the “imagined community” of Britain out
of disparate cultures and “nations”; elites and power
structures, class conflict , gender assertion and ideas
of ”race”; post-imperial crisis of identity and European
Union membership. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS436 The British Empire & Commonwealth in World
History
From 16th century rise to 20th century decline of British
world power: constitutional development of settler
colonies into Dominions, contrasted with non-settler
colonies; Commonwealth issues and membership crises
since the 1950s. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS437 Civilisations of the Ancient Near East &
Mediterranean
Science and technology, ancient slavery, identifying
major achievements, of each major civilization, from the
”hydraulic societies” of ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt,
through the real or supposed “democracy” of ancient
Greece, to the end of the Roman and Byzantine empires.
3 lecture hours per week.

Special Provisions for Courses HIS471 & HIS472:
Students shall be admitted to course HIS471 at the end
of the preceding academic year, and spend the Long
Vacation undertaking independent research. Admission
to HIS471 is by permission of the Department of History.
Admission to HIS472 is dependent on successful
completion of HIS471 and permission of the Department
of History

HIS441 Slave Trade & Colonial Conquest in East Africa
Environmental, cultural and chronological survey of
hunting-gathering and pastoralism on the plains to
settled agricultural kingdoms; trading in ivory and
slaves by Portuguese, French, and Swahili; British and
German intervention and colonial partition. 3 lecture
hours per week.

Students shall make presentations to departmental
research seminars, and shall be assessed (i) principally,
on the basis of their Research Project; (ii) secondarily, on
the basis of their contribution to departmental research
seminars.

HIS442 Ecology & Empire, Conservation & Politics in
Eastern Africa
Human settlement in relation to natural environment,
and effects of political intervention and land partition
including tsetse-fly and malaria, peasant farmers
and white settlers, wildlife conservation and peasant
ëbettermentí schemes. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS443 Islam, Imperialism & the Military in the Making
of Modern Egypt
Islamization and Arabization of the Nile valley and the
coast; Ottoman imperial rule; France and Britain; rise of
Egyptian nationalism; Sudan condominium; Nasser and
Nasserism in the Arab world; Egypt’s role in Palestine,
Islamic fundamentalism. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS444 French Colonialism & its Aftermath in North
Africa
Ottoman imperial rule but Morocco independent;
imposition of French colonial rule, alienation of land,
white settlement; rise of nationalism and socialism,
anti-colonial insurgence; post-colonial developments
and contemporary problems. 3 lecture hours per week.
HIS445 Globalisation and Third World Economies in
Africa, Latin America and South-east Asia
How Africa found its modern development path
compared with Latin America and South-East Asia:
“African capitalism”, agrarian transition, technology
and productivity, incorporation into the international
economy, and debates in economic history. 3 lecture
hours per week.

HIS473 Special Seminar I
Special seminars are based on reading and resources
recommended by the expert staff member in a chosen
topic. Each seminar typically consists of an essay
presentation by one student and a brief critique by
another student, followed by discussion. 3 seminar
hours per week.
HIS474 Special Seminar II
(Description as for HIS 473)
HIS601 History Research Methodology
The nature of History and the techniques utilized for
research and writing in the discipline: collection,
evaluation, analysis and interpretation of data, and
the presentation of the data in a coherent meaningful
account in support of a point of view. 3 seminar hours
per week
HIS602 Philosophy of History
The course deals with the theoretical and philosophical
aspects of historical studies. It focuses on theory of
knowledge or epistemology of history as a discipline,
and the reflections of scholars on the course of human
history as a whole. 3 seminar hours per week
HIS603 Historiographical Issues in Pre-colonial
Southern Africa
The course commences by considering the major
“schools” of historical writing about Southern Africa,
and then examines debates among historians, mainly in
the 19th century, ending with colonization and African
responses to it. 3 seminar hours per week

HIS446 Growth, Policy and Poverty in Africa, Latin
America, South & South-East Asia
Comparing pre-colonial, colonial and postcolonial
world regions: institutional settings, rise of capitalist
development, contending rationalities in the agricultural
sector, famines, hunger, and starvation; persistence of
poverty and social exclusion. 3 lecture hours per week.

HIS604 Historiographical Issues in Modern Southern
Africa
The focus is on continual discourse and debate among
historians concerning topics mainly in the 20th
century, to give students a good grasp of the main
historiographical trends and enable them to be more
analytical and critical in their own research. 3 seminar
hours per week

HIS471 Research Project: Fieldwork & Preliminary
Report
If the HIS 306 proposal has been accepted by the History
Department Board, the student is allocated a supervisor
and conducts fieldwork during the winter period. The
preliminary draft report is presented at a seminar during
Semester I. 3 credits.

HIS611 Introduction to the Economic History of Africa
The course takes a topical approach to economic
development in Africa, focusing on the origins of
ìAfrican capitalismî and industrialization in North and
Sub-Saharan Africa, and on controversies and debates
in the economic history literature. 3 seminar hours per
week

HIS472 Research Project: Intermediate & Final Reports
If the HIS 472 preliminary report has been judged
satisfactory by the History Department Board, the
student presents an intermediate report to a seminar
and then submits a final report at the end of Semester
II. 2 seminar hours per week.. 9 credits

HIS612 Case Studies in the Economic History of Africa
Topics range from the economy of precolonial Africa,
through critical examination of contending rationalities
in agriculture, institutional rigidities and the political
economy of famines, hunger, and starvation, persistence
of poverty and economics of social exclusion. 3 seminar

130

hours per week
HIS613 Political and Economic Aspects of Imperialism
European imperialism has had a profound impact
on recent world history, and yet it is surprisingly
hard to explain satisfactorily. This course reviews the
main political and economic explanations for the
phenomenon. 3 seminar hours per week
HIS614 Cultural and Environmental Approaches to the
History of Imperialism
The course considers scholarly issues and approaches
in the relationship between culture and imperialism,
including “postcolonial” theory, on the topics of
empire, race and gender; the Orientalism debate; and
environmental and scientific imperialism. 3 seminar
hours per week
HIS615 History of Religion in Africa
An overview of the historical study of religion in Africa,
including introduction to the main theoretical issues.
Students completing this course should be familiar
with and able to discuss the main ideas current in the
historical study of African religion. 3 seminar hours per
week.
HIS616 Religion and Power in Botswana
The course surveys relations between religion and power,
including “traditional religion” and chieftainship, impact
of missionaries and traders, “church and state”, conflicts
over medicine, rise of independent churches, and impact
of post-colonial secularism. 3 seminar hours per week
HIS627 Archaeology for Teachers
Designed for secondary school teachers to update
and expand their knowledge of three archaeological
modules: human evolution, the origins of food
production, and the origins of civilization, including
current theories and case studies. 3 seminar hours per
week
HIS651, HIS 652, HIS 653, & HIS 654 Special Topics I, II,
III, & IV
Topics vary from year to year, but are designed to immerse
students in recent advanced scholarship in areas of
expertise of current staff. The course begins with a
historiographical introduction by the staff member, and
proceeds as a seminar under his/her guidance. 3 seminar
hours per week
HIS662 Research Proposal for Dissertation
This course provides a structure in which students
prepare their research proposals. Students will meet
regularly with assigned staff members, and will be
required to make periodic reports. 2 credits/ tutorial
hours per week
GEC265 Two World Wars on Film
The course introduces students to public discourse
on the two World Wars of the 20th centuryóhow
Europe, America and Japan, and their colonial empires,
underwent war and genocide; the impact of warfare
on their economies and societies; and how visual
media have reported, represented, interpreted and
manipulated events. 2 lecture hours
GEC362 Africa and its Past on Film
Introducing students to the creation and recreation
of the history and imagery of Africa in cinema and
television, how the African past has been represented
in major television series, and how Southern Africa
people, particularly Zulu and Khoe and San, have been
represented in drama and documentary films. 2 lecture
hours

GEC462 Reconstructing African Heritage through
Multimedia
The course uses specially designed audiovisual
multimedia materials to study the major achievements
of African prehistory evidenced by the remains of
material cultures, the representation of material
heritage by archaeologists, and how African heritage
can be maintained and marketed. 2 lecture hours
Programme Structure:
Requirements for Major and Minor Programmes in
History:
For all programmes, students must take all core courses:
Level 200 semester 1: HIS201
Level 200 semester 2: HIS202
Level 300 semester 1: HIS305
Level 300 semester 2: HIS306
Level 400 semester 1: HIS401
Level 400 semester 2: HIS412 or HIS414 or HIS416.
(Note: HIS102 and HIS104 will normally be taken but
are not core requirements.)
Students must also accumulate the necessary total
credits by taking optional courses. Total credits required:
Single Major: 80 credits
Major in Major/Minor degree: 56 credits
Major in Double Major degree: 40 credits
Minor: 24 credits (optional courses not required)
Construction of programme:
Students have a free choice as to optional courses,
and may take varying numbers of optional courses
in different semesters, provided the total credits are
achieved.
Guide to typical course loads:
(This is a guide to achieving the required credits in
an even pace, and not a requirement. It assumes that
HIS102 and HIS104 have been taken; otherwise slightly
more courses will be required.)
Single Major: Typically one core and 3-4 optional in
levels 200-400
Major in Major Minor: Typically one core and 2 optional
in levels 200-400
Double Major: Typically one core and one optional in
levels 200-400.
Minor: One core course each semester.
Award of Degree
The award of the Degree shall be as per General
Regulations 00.852. Candidates must pass all core
courses, and achieve credits as follows:
Single Major in Archaeology:
80 credits in Archaeology
Double Major in Archaeology & another Subject in
Major/ Major combined degree:
40 credits in Archaeology
Major in Archaeology in Major/Minor combined degree:
56 credits in Archaeology
Minor in Archaeology in Major/ Minor combined degree:
24 credits in Archaeology
Multi-disciplinary combined degree, with Archaeology
courses therein: 12 credits in Archaeology
Single Major in History: 80 credits in History

Double Major in History & another Subject in Major/
Major combined degree: 40 credits in History
Major in History in Major/Minor combined degree:
56 credits in History
Minor in History in Major/ Minor combined degree:
24 credits in History
Multi-disciplinary combined degree, with History courses
therein: 12 credits in History

DEPARTMENT OF LIBRARY &
INFORMATION STUDIES
CAR100 Special Regulations for the Certificate in
Archives and Records Management (Offered over 2
winter sessions)
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and Faculty of Humanities Regulations, the
following Departmental Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirements for entrance to the Certificate
in Archives and Records Management Program shall be:
Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education
or equivalent with at least passes in three subjects
including English. Applicants with at least one year work
experience in a registry or related institutions will be
preferred.
Programme Structure
The Certificate in Archives and Records Management
extends over two semesters for full-time study of the
single subject Archives and Records Management
leading to the award of the Certificate in Archives and
Records Management. Students can take a minimum
of 6 credits of optional courses or elective courses. The
Program shall consist of a minimum of 30 credits. All
core courses must be passed.
COURSE SYNOPSES FOR CERTIFICATE IN ARCHIVES AND
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
REC 011: INTRODUCTION TO RECORDS
MANAGEMENT
Definitions and terminology. The Records life cycle and
Records continuum. Role of Records management in the
organization. Records and society. Differences between
libraries, archives, museums. Types of registriescentralized versus decentralized. Filing equipmentselection procurement and maintenance, reprographic.
Records inventory and analysis and scheduling, filing
classification systems. 3 hr lecture
REC 012: INTRODUCTION TO ARCHIVES
Historical developments of European archival practices,
historical developments in Eastern and Southern African
region. Definitions and terms, acquisition of archival
materials- transfers, in-house collection programs,
donations, purchases. Development of acquisition policy,
appraisal, and accessioning, 3 hr lecture
REC 013: INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES OF ARCHIVAL
ARRANGEMENT
Principals of archival arrangement. Reasons for arranging
Records. Early practices in arranging records. Evolution

131

of the principles of Provenance and principle of Original
Order. Arranging records into series. Administrative
notes. Chronological arrangement. Topographical
arrangement. Arrangement by records type. Alphabetical
arrangement. Description of records. Finding aids. 3 hr
lecture
REC 014: SEARCH ROOM OPERATIONS
Search room design and layout, search room procedures:
Entry and exit interviews, Access to public Records.
Accelerated opening.
Extended closure: criteria, closure period applications.
Privileged access: conditions, un-reviewed and unlisted
Records. Procedures. Outreach programs: exhibitions,
educational kits, and Archival ethics. 3 hr lecture
REC 015: INTRODUCTION TO OFFICE SKILLS
The Office world. Location of office, office environment:
office layout and design, office furniture and
equipment, heating lighting, ventilation, noise, and
safety in the office. office reprographic systems, office
communication systems: media selection, written
communication, meetings and conferences: arranging
and servicing formal meetings. 3 hr lecture
REC 016: STUDENT PLACEMENTS
Students will be attached for a period of three weeks
in a registry, records office, reprographic centre or
other information centers where they will be required
to related course work to office environment. 6 weeks
duration
REC 017: INTRODUCTION TO INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
Introduction to computers, computer hardware and
software, computer applications-databases, word
processes and spreadsheets and e-mail, elementary web
design, introduction to electronic sources, introduction
Internet technology. 3 hr Computing activity
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
LIS110:
Administration and Management of
Information Centres (3)
REC011: Introduction to Records Management (3)
REC012: Introduction to Archives (3).
REC015: Introduction to Office Skills (3)
REC017: Introduction to Information Technology
(3)
General Education Courses
COM111: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (Humanities) (3)
ICT111:
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
Semester 2
Core Courses
REC013: Intro to Principles of Archival
Arrangement (3)
REC014: Search Room Operations (3)
REC016: Practicum (3)
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112:
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2) CORE
Optional Courses
LIS104:
Introduction to the Internet and Web
Design (3)
LIS106:
Information Resources Management (3)

Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall apply
according to Regulation 00.9.

Aesthetic design principles and consideration of the
potential users of web documents. 1-lecture hour; 2-hr
Computing activity.

Assessment and Examinations
Evaluation of students’ performance in the Certificate
in Archives and Records Management Program shall
be based on continuous assessment and a formal
examination at the end of each semester. The weighting
between continuous assessment and formal examination
shall be 2:3.

LIS 106: INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
The course will be introductory and will expose students
to issues on information resources management, how
and why information resources should be managed, and
the role that technology place in this whole scenario.
3-hr lecture

CAREER OPPORTUNITIES - CERTIFICATE IN ARCHIVES
AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Holders of the Certificate in Archives and Records
Management will be expected to occupy positions in
government, private, parastatal organizations, land
boards and district council as records officers, registry
clerks and administrative officers.
CLS100 Special Regulations for the Certificate in Library
and Information Studies (Offered over 2 winter sessions)
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and Faculty of Humanities Regulations, the
following Departmental Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirements for entrance to the Certificate
in Library and Information Studies Program shall be:
Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education
or equivalent with at least passes in three subjects
including English. Applicants with at least one year
work experience in a library or related institutions will
be preferred.
Programme Structure
The Certificate in Library and Information Studies
extends over two winter semesters for full-time study in
the single subject Library Information Studies leading to
the award of the Certificate in Library and Information
Studies. Students can take a minimum of 6 credits of
optional courses or elective courses. The Program shall
consist of a minimum of 30 credits. All core courses must
be passed.
COURSE SYNOPSES FOR CERTIFICATE IN LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION STUDIES
LIS 100: INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT
The course will cover the meaning of information and
its importance; what an information environment
encompasses, and the specific environment of Africa.
3-hr lecture
LIS 101: INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIZING INFORMATION
The course will introduce students to the need for
organizing information in order to facilitate its retrieval.
The principles of classification and cataloguing will be
taught in both manual and computerized environments.
3-hr lecture
LIS 103: BASIC REFERENCE SOURCES AND SERVICES
A course introducing students to the various reference
sources that are available, these include print as well as
electronic. 3-hr lecture
LIS 104: INTRODUCTION TO THE INTERNET AND WEB
DESIGN
Covers the Internet and the various information
resources that it can provide; the history of the Internet
and the technology; retrieval and searching techniques;
HTML for designing WWW documents and pages;

LIS 110: ADMINISTRATIVE AND MANAGEMENT OF
INFORMATION CENTERS
The course will introduce students to basic concepts of
management, relating these to management of library
and information centers.
The course will look at the issues and of managing and
administration of information centers and attempt to
provide answers and solutions based on management
concepts. 3-hr lecture
LIS 112: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLISHING AND THE BOOK
TRADE
Aims at exposing students to the different stages of the
publishing industry and to the modern techniques of
the publishing industry; the book trade in general and
in Africa and problems therein, and possible steps and
solutions that have been suggested. 3-lecture hour
LIS 114: COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT & MANAGEMENT
Students will be introduced to the need for collection
development and management in library and
information centers. This will cover what to consider
when developing collections: user needs, evaluating
materials, development of collection development
policies and so on. 3-hr lecture
BIM 100: INTRODUCTION TO INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT.
The purpose of the course is to familiarize students with
the principles of information management especially
the importance of information management practice
within organisations. Topics covered include: Data
content (quality) and structure; creating data standards;
data access; record retention; information reporting.
1-lecture hour; 2-hr Computing activity.
BIM 101: INTRODUCTION TO INFORMATION SCIENCE
Introduction to information science concepts. Students
will be familiarized with the problems of defining
information as well as the scope information science.
Various information science topics will be covered, such
as information representation, information storage
and retrieval systems, user studies, information seeking
behaviour, etc. 3 hr lecture
REC 016: STUDENT PLACEMENTS
Students will be attached for a period of three weeks in
a library or other information centers where they will be
required to related course work to office environment. 6
weeks duration
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
LIS 100:
The Information Environment (3)
LIS 101:
Introduction to Organizing Information(3)
LIS 103:
Basic Reference Sources and Services (3)
LIS 110:
Admin & Management of Information
Centres (3)
BIM 100: Introduction to Information Management (3)

132

GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112:
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2) CORE
Semester 2
Core Courses
BIM 101: Introduction to Information Science (3)
LIS 114:
Collection Development & Management (3)
REC 016: Practicum (3)
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112:
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2) CORE
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall apply
according to Regulation 00.9.
Assessment and Examinations
Evaluation of students’ performance in the Certificate
in Library and Information Studies shall be based on
continuous assessment and a formal examination
at the end of each semester. The weighting between
continuous assessment and formal examination shall
be 2:3.
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES - CERTIFICATE IN LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION STUDIES
Candidates with the Certificate in Library and
Information Studies will be expected to occupy positions
in government, private, parastatal organizations, schools,
colleges and universities as library clerks, library officer
or junior information officer.
DIS110 Special Regulations for the Diploma in Library
and Information Studies
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and the Faculty of Humanities, the
following Departmental Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirement for entrance to the Diploma in
Library and Information Studies Program shall be:
Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education or
equivalent with a credit in English; Certificate in Library
and Information Studies from this University or its
equivalent from any other recognized institution.
Candidates with a Certificate in Library and Information
Studies from this University shall be admitted directly to
Level 2 of the Diploma Program.
All candidates for admission must have a minimum
of credit in English Language in Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education or equivalent.
Programme Structure
The Diploma in Library and Information Studies
Programme extends over four semesters for full-time
study or six semesters for part-time (distance learning)
study in the single subject Library and Information
Studies leading to the award of the Diploma in Library
and Information Studies.
COURSE SYNOPSES FOR THE DIPLOMA IN LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION STUDIES
Level 100 Same as in the Certificate in Library and
Information Studies

LIS 200: ORGANIZING INFORMATION
A practical course on classification and. Covers
information carriers; principles of cataloguing,
descriptive cataloguing, choice of access points;
fundamentals of classification, Dewey Decimal
Classification scheme, Library of Congress Classification
scheme. 3-hr lecture
LIS 202: IT TOOLS AND APPLICATIONS
This course covers the various applications of information
technology tools for managing and disseminating
information. This covers software applications as well as
networking applications. 3-hr Computing activity.
LIS 203: AFRICAN INFORMATION RESOURCES
The course will provide an overview of the various
African information resources. Included will be a look at
indigenous knowledge systems that have been such an
integral part of the African culture. 3-hr lecture.
LIS 205: LIBRARY PRACTICE AND ATTACHMENT
Students are attached to libraries and information
centers in order to gain experience of real-life libraries
and understand the issues that such libraries have
to deal with, and also suggest possible solutions to
problems that may pertain in those libraries. 6 weeks
duration
LIS 206: INTRODUCTION TO INFOPRENEURSHIP
Aims to guide, encourage and point out to students the
options, openings and possibilities for self-employment,
employment creation and the requirements for
establishing and managing of enterprises with a specific
focus on information based enterprises. Will introduce
the concept of entrepreneurship and what it entails.
3-hour lecture
LIS208: PRINCIPLES OF DATA COMMUNICATIONS
Protocols and architecture.
Data Transmission.
Transmission Media and multiplexing. Data encoding.
Data communication interface. Data link control.
Network hardware and software. Evolving network
technologies. 3-hour lecture
LIS 211 INFORMATION AND SOCIETY
Covered will be: introduction information; why is
information important in society; the impact of
information on society; issues of information privacy,
information and development; right to information.
3-hr lecture
LIS 212: INFORMATION RESOURCES IN BUSINESS
This course will be an exploration of the universe of
business information sources and services. It will
introduce students to the business information world,
the value chain and competitiveness, nature, type
and range and role of business information, Business
information sources, systems and services. 3-hr lecture
LIS 223: DIGITAL LIBRARIES
The course will cover definitions of digital libraries, their
implications for the future of the library as we know it,
and the different initiatives that are in place towards
developing digital libraries. 3-hr lecture
LIS 227: INTRODUCTION TO KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
The course will cover definitions of knowledge
management; importance of knowledge management
in an organisational setting; processes and tools of
knowledge management. 3-hr lecture
LIS 230: LEGAL ISSUES OF INFORMATION
The course will cover various legal issues of information,

including intellectual property laws, copyright,
transborder information flows, privacy of information,
etc. 3-hr lecture
BIM 202: DATABASES AND INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
This course will give the students the ability to utilize
a broad variety of existing databases and to create
databases of their own using a database management
software package. 1-lecture hour; 2-hr Computing
activity.
Level 100 Same as in the Certificate in Library and
Information Studies
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
LIS202:
IT Tools and Applications (3)
LIS223:
Digital Libraries (3)
LIS206:
Introduction to Infopreneurship (3)
General Education Courses should not exceed 6 credits
for both semesters
Optional Courses
LIS203:
African Information Environment (3)
LIS211:
Information and Society (3)
BIM200: Information Management Systems
Development (3)

the following Departmental Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirements for entrance to the Diploma in
Archives and Records Management Programme shall be:
a) Certificate in Archives and Records Management
from this University or its equivalent from any other
recognized institution;
b) Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education
or equivalent with a credit in English;
c) Candidates with a credit in the Certificate in Archives
and Records Management from this University shall
be admitted directly to Year Two of the Diploma
Programme. Those with a pass in the Certificate in
Archives and Records Management of this University
plus two years post qualification experience will be
admitted directly to Year Two.
Programme Structure
The Diploma in Archives and Records Management
Programme extends over four semesters for full-time
study or six semesters for part-time (distance learning/
sandwich) study in the single subject Archives and
Records Management leading to the award of the
Diploma in Archives and Records Management. The
Programme shall consist of a minimum of 30 credits per
year. All core courses must be passed.

GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112:
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2) CORE

COURSE SYNOPSES FOR DIPLOMA IN ARCHIVES AND
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
LEVEL 100
Level 100 courses: same as in the Certificate in Archives
and Records Management Programme.

Semester 4
Core Courses
LIS200:
Organising Information (3)
LIS205:
Library Practice and Attachment (3)
LIS227:
Introduction to Knowledge 		
Management (3)
ISS221:
Data and Information Management 1 (3)
General Education Courses should not exceed 6credits
for both semesters

LEVEL 200

Optional Courses
LIS212:
Information Resources in Business (3)
LIS230:
Legal Aspects in Information (3)
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall apply
according to Regulation 00.9.
Assessment and Examinations
Evaluation of students’ performance in the Diploma
in Library and Information Studies shall be based on
continuous assessment and a formal examination at the
end of each semester. The weighting between continuous
assessment and formal examination shall be 2:3.
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES - DIPLOMA IN LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION STUDIES
Holders of the Diploma in Library and Information
Studies certificate will be expected to occupy positions
in government, private, parastatal organisations, schools,
colleges and universities as assistant librarians or library
officers.
DAR110 Special Regulations for the Diploma in Archives
and Records Management
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and the Faculty of Humanities Regulations,

133

REC 211: ADMINISTRATIVE HISTORY
Administration: the word and concept, colonial
administration and colonial records. The evolution of
central departments and ministerial arrangements, local
administration. The struggle for independence. Postindependence administrative arrangements. Types and
formats of records created under these administrative
arrangements 3 hr lecture
REC 212: MANAGING MEDIA ARCHIVES
Nature of audio-visual materials. Uses of a-v
materials. Formats of a-v archives-films, photographs,
phonographic records, audiocassettes, microforms,
maps, art works. Advantages and disadvantages,
selection and acquisition of, handling and of audiovisual materials, storage equipment, staffing, evaluation
of a-v programs, access and copyright restrictions. 3 hr
lecture
REC 213: INTRODUCTION TO PRESERVATION AND
CONSERVATION
Definitions and terminology, history of preservation and
conservation, history of writing and recording media,
characteristics of paper and materials used in books
and other media, the agents of deterioration, preventive
conservation, cleaning methods, data migration, disaster
prevention and recovery, planning and implementing a
preservation program. 3 hr lecture
REC 215: REPROGRAPHICS
Principles of printing, photography, xerography,
photocopying, principles of microphotography, hardware
systems, COM and electronic typesetting, Selection and
acquisition of reprographic equipment, maintenance.
Design and control of central microfilming service. Links
with Vital Records program. 3 hr lecture

REC 216: RECORDS CENTRE MANAGEMENT
Location of Records centres, building requirement,
storage and facilities, procedures for Records transfer
and retrieval, links with government agencies, staffing.
Reference services. 3 hr lecture
REC 218: COMPUTER APPLICATIONS IN ARCHIVES AND
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
This course is designed to enable students understand
the appropriate use of Information Communication
Technologies (ICTs) in the design, implementation and
evaluation of an efficient and effective archives and
records management programme. It provides students
an opportunity to study in-depth issues, challenges, and
strategies associated with electronic records/archival
management. 3 hr Computing activity
Level 100
Same as in the Certificate in Archives and Records
Management
Semester 1
Core Courses
LIS110:
Admin. and Management of Information
Centres (3)
REC011: Introduction to Records Management (3)
REC012: Introduction to Archives (3)
REC015: Introduction to Office Skills (3)
REC017: Introduction to Information Technology (3)
General Education Courses
COM111: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (Humanities) (3)
ICT111:
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)

REC216: Records Centre Management (3)
Optional Courses
BMS207: Public Relations, Writing and Reporting(3)
LIS212:
Information Resources in Business (3)
LIS230:
Legal Aspects in Information (3)
LIS227:
Introduction to Knowledge 		
Management (3)
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall apply
according to Regulation 00.9.
Assessment and Examinations
Evaluation of students’ performance for the Diploma in
Archives and Records Management shall be based on
continuous assessment and a formal examination at the
end of each semester. The weighting between continuous
assessment and formal examination shall be 2:3.
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES - DIPLOMA IN ARCHIVES AND
RECORDS MANAGERS
Holders of the Diploma in Archives and Record
Management will be expected to occupy positions in
government, private, parastatal organizations, land
boards and district councils records managers and
administrative personnel in records centres.
BIS210 BACHELOR OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS
(INFORMATION MANAGEMENT) (BIS) DEGREE
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirements for entrance to the Bachelor of
Information Systems (Information Management) Degree
Programme shall be the Botswana General Certificate
of Secondary Education or equivalent with a credit in
English Language and Mathematics.

Semester 2
Core Courses
REC013: Intro to Principles of Archival
Arrangement (3)
REC014: Search Room Operations (3)
REC016: Practicum (3)

Programme Structure
The BIS Degree is a full-time programme extending
over eight semesters in the subject of Information
Management, leading to the award of a Bachelor of
Information Systems Degree.

Optional Courses
LIS104:
Introduction to the Internet & Web
Design (3)
LIS106:
Information Resources Management (3)

COURSE SYNOPSES FOR BACHELOR OF INFORMATION
SYSTEMS (INFORMATION MANAGEMENT) (BIS) DEGREE
Degree in Information systems (Information
Management)

GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112: Communication and Academic Literacy
Study Skills II (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112:
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 		
(2) CORE

LEVEL 100
Semester 1
STA101: MATHEMETICS FOR BUSINESS AND SOCIAL
SCIENCES I (3)

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
REC212: Managing Media Archives (3)
REC213: Introduction to Preservation and 		
Conservation (3)
REC218: Computer Applications in Archives and
Records Management (3)
LIS101:
Introduction to Organizing Information
(3) (pre-requisite for LIS 200)
General Education Courses
Semester 4
Core Courses
LIS200:
Organising Information (3)
Pre-requisite, LIS101)
REC211: Administrative History (3)
REC215: Microphotography & Reprographics (3)

ISS101: IS FOUNDATIONS 1
Course covers the fundamental concepts and
components of information systems; achieving
competitive advantage with information systems,
information technology infrastructure; hardware,
software, telecommunications and networks (the
Internet, wired and wireless technologies), databases
and information management. Personal technology.
3-hr lecture/lab
ARM 100: Introductions to Records Management:
This course introduces students to managing records
as tools for good governance, accountability and
transparency, and effective decision making in ensuring
legislative and regulatory compliance and preserving
corporate memory of organizations. Topics to be covered
include: Definitions of Records, Records Management
Theories, Procedures for Managing Current (Developing
and Designing Classification and Records Tracking

134

Systems), Managing Semi-current (Records Retirement,
Application and Use Records Retention and Disposition
Schedules) and Managing Non-current Records,
LIM100: Introduction to Information Science: This
course provides an introduction to the nature of
information science, information architecture and
general principles that underlie information processing
and information theory. It will cover topics such
as: Definitions of Information Science; Information
Architecture; Human Computer Interaction, Models of
Information Retrieval, Information Systems Analysis;
Organisational Informatics; IT and Organisations and
Knowledge Management.
COM 111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills 1 (3)
This course is designed to assist students develop
balanced proficiency in the four major communicative
skills ó listening, reading, speaking, and writing for
academic and general purposes.
Semester 2
STA102: MATHEMETICS FOR BUSINESS AND SOCIAL
SCIENCES II (3)
LIM202: Management of Library and Information
Systems:
The course covers the structure and components of
management systems for library and information service
providers and creators. Content includes: Management
Information Systems and Packages for Transaction
Processing and Decision Support; Expert Systems,
Artificial Intelligence and Strategies for providing
Successful Management Information.
ISS102: IS FOUNDATIONS 2
The course introduces fundamental concepts of IS. Topics
covered included: Electronic Business Systems (Enterprise
Applications & Functional Systems), Electronic Commerce
Systems, Decision Support Systems and Knowledge
Management Systems, Building information systems and
managing projects, securing information systems, ethical
and social issues in information system, etc. 3 hr lecture
ISS112: INTRODUCTION TO PROGRAMMING
The courses introduces classes, objects and methods;
Variables, assignment statements, and built-in data
types; Expressions and statements; Control Statements:
if, if-else; while and do while; for; switch, break and
continue; Logical operators; Increment and decrement
operators; Arrays; Introduction to algorithms: pseudocode; counter-controlled repetition, sentinel-controlled
repetition, nested control statements. Input/output
statements and streams; Introduction to modularity,
with emphasis on well-designed functions/methods to
facilitate debugging, maintainability and reuse of code.
COM 112 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills 11 (3)
This course is designed to provide development of
writing proficiency through intensive instruction
in academic writing skills and teaches students the
rhetorical principles and writing practices necessary for
producing effective business letters, memos, reports, and
collaborative projects in professional contexts.
LEVEL 200
SEMESTER 3
ISS211: INTERMEDIATE PROGRAMMING (pre-requisite
ISS112)
This course introduces the software development

lifecycle and UML; Classes, objects, and collections;
Inheritance, containment and polymorphism; Arrays
of objects; Events; Generic programming; Structured
exception handling; Overview of the .Net environment.
GUI programming: List boxes, combo boxes, and other
controls and objects; Data validation; Working with files:
text files, binary files, XML files; Object serialization. 3-hr
lecture / lab
LIM 200: Digital Libraries: The course is designed to give
the students an overview of digital libraries and their
role in the information or digital era. Content covers:
Conceptual, Practical and Technical Issues, Problems
and Approaches to Digital Libraries, Overview of
Differing Efforts, and Evolving Concepts and Thinking
in a Number of Fields and Enterprises, Types of Digital
Library Collections, Organization, Access and Use of
Digital Libraries, Technical Infrastructure and Processes
for Building Digital Libraries, Research Projects, such as
Digital Libraries Initiatives, Social and Economic Issues,
Integration of Digital and Traditional Resources in
Libraries.
ISS221: DATA AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT I
The course discusses fundamental principles and concepts
of databases; DBMS architecture; components of DBMS;
data models; database design: conceptual and logical;
ER and Relational model; ER to Relational; Schema
refinement, functional dependencies, normalization;
SQL: DDL and DML; database application development.
3-hr lecture / lab
IKM 200: Knowledge Management Systems:
The course discusses the following: Origin, Evolution, and
Role of Knowledge Management Systems; Components
of a Knowledge Management System; Environmental
Scanning;
Developing Knowledge Management
System Blue Print; Prototyping and Deployment; Major
Knowledge Management Systems including Document
Management Systems, Decision Support Systems,
Group Support Systems, Executive Information Systems,
Workflow Management Systems; Conceptual and
Theoretical Frameworks on Integration of Systems in
Organizations’ Business Processes.
LIM 201: Publishing and the Book Trade:
The publishing industry underpins the work of librarians
and how it operates has implications for how librarians
work, and of course, what items they stock in their
libraries. The course considers the relationship between
libraries and the book trade together with three
areas of the law (Copyright, Public Lending Right and
Censorship) which affect both libraries and the trade.
It studies each step of the publishing process, the role
of marketing and how books are promoted and the
different types of publishers, including issues related to
electronic publishing. Additionally, the course examines
the publishing industry in the SADC countries as well as
the role of women’s publishers today.
SEMESTER 4
STA114: BUSINESS STATISTICS
ISS202: IT TOOLS & PRODUCTIVITY
This course introduces knowledge work productivity
concepts; advanced software functionality to support
personal and group productivity such as templates
and macros; reuse rather than build from scratch;
organization and management of data (sorting, filtering)
via spreadsheets and database tools; building decision
support systems; accessing organizational and external
data; information search strategies; tool use optimization
and personalization; professional; Web page design and

publishing. 3-hr lecture
ISS212: ADVANCED PRROGRAMMING
This course enables students apply OO concepts to solve
real-world problems by exploring advanced string
manipulation and regular expressions; Advanced GUI
design & implementation; Multiple-form programs;
Implementing menus; Implementing online help;
Graphics; Multithreading; Network programming;
Designing and implementing database front ends:
writing queries and stored procedures, making
connections, executing SQL commands, etc. 3-hr lecture
/ lab
LIM202: Management of Library and Information
Systems:
The course covers the structure and components of
management systems for library and information service
providers and creators. Content includes: Management
Information Systems and Packages for Transaction
Processing and Decision Support; Expert Systems,
Artificial Intelligence and Strategies for providing
Successful Management Information.
ARM 201: Preservation of Information Materials:
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to
the measures required to prolong the useful life of
records, archives and other documentary materials and
to ensure that they remain accessible over time. The
topics to be covered include: History of Paper and Paper
Making, Preservation and Conservation, Nature and
Quality of Materials; Agents of Deterioration – Physical,
Mechanical, Biological, Chemical, Damage, Collection
Care, Disaster Management and Disaster Preparedness,
Preservation Planning Programmes, Policies and
Procedures, National and International Preservation
Organizations
LIM 204: Information Literacy:
The course will equip students with knowledge to
understand and define information literacy theories
and models, information seeking behaviour, as well
as the role and purpose of cognitive skills such as
recognition of relevance, analysis, synthesis, induction,
deduction, evaluation, and thinking processes such as
defining a problem. The course will also equip students
with problem-solving strategies which should be
instrumental in imparting the knowledge of utilizing
new and unique sources of information, as well as
embracing emerging information literacy standards
which promote life-long learning skills. These skills are
embodied in the various information literacy models
and theories which will form part of the course.
LEVEL 300
Semester 5
ISS321: DATA & INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 2
This course introduces database management and
design concepts by exploring advanced SQL: sub queries
and correlated queries, SQL functions, procedural SQL;
database application development: database life cycle;
XML data management: data model, query; Security
and authorization; database administration: tools
and strategies; emerging database technologies and
applications. 3-hr lecture / lab
ISS331: NETWORK MANAGEMENT
The course introduces the basic of network management
by exploring the different types of networks; Core
network components; OSI and TCP/IP models; Network
security and security devices; The Internet as a key
networking platform; Data centers and network data
storage; Service oriented network architectures; IT

135

management frameworks; Business continuity planning;
Network device configuration; Connecting to the
ISP; Network topologies and protocols; Management
paradigms and protocols for both wired and wireless
networks; Network monitoring and tuning. 3-hr lecture
/ lab
ISS323: IS ANALYSIS & DESIGN 1
This course introduces the basic concepts of Systems
Analysis and design, SDLC, OO Systems Analysis, the
Unified Process, the Unified Modelling Language, Project
identification and Selection, Feasibility study techniques,
Project Management, Requirements Analysis, Use Case
Diagrams, Class Diagrams and Interaction Diagrams.
LIM 304: Information and Society:
Technology plays an increasingly important role in
today’s global society. In this course, the impact and
significance of the information age is explored in
several social contexts including economic, political,
cultural, legal, environmental, historical, ergonomic, and
psychological. The course covers the technical, moral,
ethical, and legal challenges of information access
and use. The course covers MDGs and Information;
Universal Access, Universal Services, Open Access;
Internet Regulation, Legislation, Legal Cases and Issues,
Internet and Democracy: Governmental Transparency
and Citizens’ Political Participation, Using and Misusing
the Internet, Who is Afraid of the Internet, Privacy
and Security, WSIS, Digital Solidarity Fund, AISI, ICT
Infrastructure Development in Africa, Africa e-Schools
Project and e-Europe.
LIM 300: User Needs and Services:
The general purpose of this course is to enable students
to understand the theory, principles, and techniques
underlying information use and seeking behaviour
with special emphasis on applying user-centred
approaches. The content covers; Definition, Basic
Concepts and History of User Study, Types of Users, User
Studies and Human Information Behaviour, Models of
Information Seeking Behaviour, Different Information
Seeking Behaviour, User-centred Design, Information
and Poverty and Everyday Life Information Seeking
Behaviour, Community Information Needs and Services,
Evaluation of Reference and Information Services.
SEMESTER 6
ISS324: IS ANALYSIS & DESIGN 2 (pre-requisite, ISS323)
This course explores System Design, Class and Method
Design, Data Base Design, User Interface Design,
Systems Acquisition, Systems Development, systems
Installation and Testing, Systems Documentation,
Systems Review. 3-hr lecture
ISS332: SYSTEMS ADMINISTRATION (pre-requisite,
ISS331)
This course explores operating systems (functions and
services, file systems and storage, user interfaces);
Introduction to system administration; Installation
of some current OS and applications; Configuration
of installed OS and applications; Maintenance of
installed OS and applications; Virtualization; System
documentation; Server services(print, file, DHCP, DNS,
FTP, HTTP, mail, SNMP, SSH, Database, Web, network
services, etc); Client services; System and application
support; Server administration and management; User
and group management; Backup management; Disaster
recovery; System support; User support and education;
Administrative domains (Web, Network, Database, OS,
Support). 3-hr lecture / lab

ISS334: IS SECURITY (pre-requisite, ISS331)
This course introduces the basic concepts of information
security; Operational, physical, and personnel security
issues; Access control; Basic cryptography; Operating
system security; Network security; Application security;
Security policies and models; Intrusion detection,
prevention and response; Risk assessment. 3-hr lecture
/ lab
ISS302: INDUSTRIAL ATTACHMENT (pre-requisite,
ISS211, ISS202)
A practicum designed to give students in-depth
professional development. 12 weeks duration
LIM 302: Content Management
The course exposes students to the principles of data
organization using advanced techniques of developing
indexes and abstract that will guide user to locate
information carriers in a collection. The main areas of
focus will include: Introduction to Data/Information
Organization, Data/Information Organization using
Metadata and Data Dictionary (Types of Metadata,
Functions of Metadata, etc); Indexing Methods and
Procedures, Pre-coordination and Post-coordination in
Indexing and Quality of Indexes, Introduction to Abstract
and Abstracting (Overview and Theory of Abstracting,
Types of Abstracts, Principles and Procedures of
Abstracting, Determining Aboutness in Documents for
Abstracting).
ARM 301: Electronic Records Management:
This course introduces students to the management of
electronic records. It provides the skills and knowledge
needed to manage electronic records throughout the
records lifecycle, and to take steps required to transition
from a paper to an electronic records environment.
Topics to be covered include: The Nature of Electronic
Records, Understanding the Concepts of Electronic
Records Management, Preserving Electronic Records in
a Trusted Digital Environment, Planning and Managing
an Electronic Records Management Programme,
Managing the Creation, Use and Disposal of Electronic
Records, Opportunities and Challenges of ERM Planning;
Technological and Organisation Context of ERM and
Managing an ERM Programme.
LEVEL 400
SEMESTER 7
ISS431: ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
This course introduces enterprise architecture
frameworks, Systems integration, and Enterprise resource
software. Service oriented architecture, Data/information
architecture and data integration, content management,
System administration, IT investment analysis, Audit and
compliance, IT control and management frameworks,
emerging technologies. Practical applications using
Enterprise Architecture Toolkits. 3-hr lecture / lab
ISS441: IS PROJECT MANAGEMENT
This course introduces the processes, methods,
techniques and tools that organizations use to manage
their information systems projects. Apply a systematic
methodology for initiating, planning, executing,
controlling, and closing projects. Understand that project
management in the modern organization is a complex
team-based activity, where various types of technologies
(including project management software as well as
software to support group collaboration) are an inherent
part of the project management process. Resourcing
of projects through internal and external sources. 3-hr
lecture

ISS443 IS RESEARCH
To introduce IS undergraduate students to the nature and
purpose of research, literature searching and reviewing,
research methodologies and approaches (quantitative
and qualitative), research strategies and design, data
analysis techniques, and planning of a research project.

Managerial and Supervisory Levels in Information
Agencies, Managing the Procurement of Information
Resources and Services, Managing People, Managing
ICT, Quality Management Issues; Security and Business
Continuity Issues, Policy and Strategy Issues; Legal
Issues, Organisation, Management and Co-ordination.

IKM 400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation:
The course covers the following topics: Introduction
to Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Planning,
Development of Entrepreneurial and Innovative
Ventures, Foundations of Entrepreneurship, Techniques
for Creative Thinking, and Processes for Developing,
Planning and Launching a New Venture including
Protecting Intellectual Property, Evaluating Markets,
Developing Innovative Business Models, Budgeting,
and Raising Finance, Communication, Public Speaking,
Writing, Interpersonal/Group Skills, Time Management,
Business Analysis, Market Research, User Orientation,
Service Orientation, Customer Management, Customer
Service, Negotiation, Public Relations

LIM 402: Legal, Ethical and Policy Issues in Information
Management:
This course exposes students to some of the legal,
ethical and policy issues in information management. It
covers: Definition of Concepts, Ethics, Legislation, Policy;
Overview of Ethical Theories and how they inform agency
policies and practices. It examines selected policy issues
relating to information and communications: Copyright,
Intellectual Property, Privacy, Censorship, Equity of
Access, Freedom of Access, Professional Liability, and
other issues; Legal Implications and Safeguards; Issues
and Challenges faced in developing and implementing
policies within organizations and companies.

IKM 401: Competitive Intelligence: The course covers:
Introduction to Competitive Intelligence, Components
in the Intelligence Cycle, Competitive Analysis and
Decision-making, Setting the Stage for the Brand,
(Porter/PESTEL), Understanding the Customers of
Analysis, Defining the Analysis Problem and Process,
Environmental Scanning.
LIM 401: Marketing of Information Products and
Services:
The course teaches students the skills needed in the
design, packaging and customisation of information
products and services. It also aims at equipping students
with strategies and techniques of marketing information
products and services.
SEMESTER 8
ISS442: IS & SOCIETY
This course introduces the theories of information systems
and societal change; information systems influencing
society; societal influence on information systems;
acceptance and adoption; appropriate technologies;
uses, access and skills; participatory processes; the future
of information systems and society; ethical, legal and
social issues of information. 3-hr lecture

STA 101; STA 102 (see descriptions under the Department
of Mathematics)
STA 114 (see descriptions under the Department of
Statistics)
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
LIM100: Introduction to Information 		
Science (3)
STA101:
Maths for Business and Social Sciences I (3)
ISS101:
IS Foundations 1 (3)
ARM100: Introduction to Records Management (3)
General Education Courses
COM111: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (Humanities) (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
LIM102: Introduction to Organising Information (3)
STA102: Maths for Business and Social Sciences II (3)
ISS102:
IS Foundations 2 (3) (pre-requisite ISS101)
ISS112:
Introduction to Programming (3) (prerequisite for ISS211)

ISS446: STRATEGIC IS MANAGEMENT
This course introduces students to a high-level
approach to the management and acquisition of ISresources within the firm. The course explores the
issues and approaches in managing the information
systems function in organizations and how the IS
function integrates/supports/enables various types
of organizational capabilities. A senior management
perspective is assumed in exploring the acquisition,
development and implementation of plans and policies
to achieve efficient and effective information systems.
3-hr lecture

GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
COM112: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills 11 (Humanities) (3) CORE

ISS402: PROJECT
Problem definition, literature review, project proposal,
identifying and employing appropriate methodology,
analysis, design and implementation of appropriate
solution; writing quality project report; technical
presentation

Optional Courses
LIM201: Publishing and the Book Trade (3)

IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies:
The course covers the following: Introduction to
Knowledge Management Strategies for Information
Agencies, An Overview of Strategic Planning and
Management in the Public Sector, Strategic Level,

136

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
ISS211:
Intermediate Programming (3)
(pre-requisite, ISS112)
ISS221:
Data & Information Management I (3)
IKM200: Knowledge Management Systems (3)
LIM200: Digital Libraries (3)

GECs and Electives
General Education Courses and electives to be chosen
by the student from any discipline throughout the
University.
Semester 4
Core Course
ISS212:
Advanced Programming (3)
(pre-requisite, ISS211)

STA114:
ISS202:

Statistical Tools for Business (3)
IT Tools & Productivity (3) (pre-requisite,
ISS211)

Optional Courses
LIM202
Management of Library and Information
Systems (3)
LIM204
Introduction Literacy (3)
ARM 201 Preservation of Information Materials (3)
GECs and Electives
General Education Courses and electives to be chosen
by the student from any discipline throughout the
University.
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
ISS321:
Data & Information Management 2 (3)
(pre-requisite, ISS221)
ISS323:
IS Analysis & Design 1 (3) (pre-requisite,
ISS102)
ISS331:
Network management (3)
Optional Courses
LIM304:
Information and Society (3)
LIM300:
User Needs and Services (3)
General Education Courses and electives to be chosen by
the student.
Semester 6
Core Courses
ISS332:
Systems administration (3) 		
((pre-requisite, ISS331) (3)
ISS334:
IS Security (pre-requisite, ISS331)
ISS324:
IS analysis & Design 2 (3) (pre-requisite,
ISS323)
ISS302:
Industrial Attachment (3)(pre-requisite,
ISS202, ISS211)
Optional Courses
ARM301: Electronic Records Management (3)
LIM302: Content Management (3)
General Education Courses and electives to be chosen by
the student.
Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
ISS431:
Enterprise Architecture (3)
(pre-requisite, ISS324)
ISS441:
IS Project Management (3)
(pre-requisite, ISS324)
ISS443:
IS Research (3) (pre-requisite, STA114)
Optional Courses
IKM400: Entrepreneuship and Innovation (3)
LIM401: Marketing of Information Services (3)
IKM401: Competitive Intelligence (3)
General Education Courses and electives to be chosen by
the student.
Semester 8
Core Courses
ISS402:
Project (3)(pre-requisite, ISS212, ISS321)
ISS442:
IS and Society (3)
ISS446:
Strategic IS Management (3)
		
Optional Courses
IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies(3)
LIM402: Legal, Ethics and Policy Issues (3)

General Education Courses and electives to be chosen by
the student.
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from semester to semester shall apply
according to Regulation 00.9.
Assessment and Examination
Evaluation of students’ performance shall be based on
continuous assessment and a formal examination at the
end of each semester. The weighting between continuous
assessment and examinations shall be determined in
each course.

It is possible to carry a higher workload within each
semester as a strategy of completing the requirements
of a student’s program. However, there is always the risk
of carrying too many credits
12. How many credits should I take in order to graduate?
Program Minimum number of credits from core, optional
and elective courses for purposes of graduation
Certificate 30 (including 4 credits from General
Education courses)
Diploma 60 (including 8-10 credits from General
Education courses)

CAREER OPPORTUNITIES- BACHELOR OF INFORMATION
SYSTEMS (INFORMATION MANAGEMENT)
Holders of the Bachelor of Information Systems
(Information Management) will be expected to
occupy positions in private, parastatal organisations,
universities and colleges as network managers,
database administrators, information systems managers,
information technology consultant, end-users support
specialists, system analyst and system developers.

Bachelors 120 (including 20 credits from General
Education courses)

Award of the Degree
Candidates must obtain a minimum of 120 credits
including all core courses and optional or elective
courses, and 20 General Education Courses. In addition,
Regulation 00.85 shall apply.

The Bachelor of Information and Knowledge
Management is a 4-year full-time single major,
combined major and major-minor degree extending
over a period of eight semesters. The BIKM programme
will lead to the award of the following degrees: BIKM
(Knowledge Management), BIKM (Archives and Records
Management) and BIKM (Library and Information
Studies) for single major and BA (IKM) for the combined
major and the major-minor.

For all students, the total credits for GECs/Electives must
not exceed a third of the total credits for a programme:
Certificate students may have no more than 10 credits
from GEC/Elective courses. This will be one third of the
minimum 30 credits required over 2 semesters to earn
the award.
Diploma students may have no more than 20 credits
GEC/Elective courses. This will be one third of the
minimum 60 credits required over levels 1 and 2 to earn
the award. Holders of Certificates who are exempted
from Diploma level 100 must take up to 6 credits of GEC/
elective courses.
Degree students may have no more than 40 credits GEC/
Elective courses. This will be one third of the minimum
120 credits required over levels 1, 2, 3 and 4 to earn the
award. Holders of Diplomas who are exempted from
Degree levels 1 and 2 must take at least 12 credits of
GEC/elective courses including at least credits from Area
3.
Students are required to take GEC/Elective credits as
follows:
Certificate and Diploma Students
At least 6 credits in Area 1 (COM 111 and 112)
At least 4 credits in Area 2 (ICT 111 and 112)
Degree students
At least 6 credits in Area 1 (COM 111 and 112)
At least 4 credits in Area 2 (ICT 11 and 112)
At least 2 credits in Area 3
At least 10 credits from Areas 4, 5, 6 and 7
11. How many credits could I take in a semester?
A full-time student undertaking a certificate, diploma,
degree program should carry a minimum workload of
15 credits per semester. Students may also carry up to
18 credits maximum, and beyond that, would have to
seek permission from the Deputy Dean’s office. A parttime student undertaking a certificate, diploma, degree
program should carry a workload of between 6 to 14
credits per semester, unless officially exempted.

137

Masters 54 (including 24 credits from dissertation and 6
credits from practical attachment)

BACHELOR OF INFORMATION AND
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT

Programme Structure
The BIKM single major common core courses are the
same for all students in the three streams at level 100
and 200. From level 300 students pursuing a single major
will be expected to specialise in any one of the following
areas:
• BIKM (Knowledge Management)
• BIKM (Archives and Records Management)
• BIKM (Library and Information Studies)
Most courses offered in the BIKM programme have 3
credits except for projects and industrial placement
which carry a maximum of 4 credits. The minimum
average credit load per semester in BIKM core courses
varies depending on the combination that the candidate
chooses. For example, a BIKM (single major) candidate
will carry credit load of 15 credits, BIKM (combined
major) 6 credits, BIKM (major minor) 10 credits per
semester respectively.
BIKM (Single Major)
Candidates must obtain a minimum of 124 credits
including all core courses and optional courses or
elective courses. The average 4-year programme credit
accumulation in core courses will be as follows:
• BIKM (Knowledge Management) - 87 credits
• BIKM (Archives and Records management) 81 credits
• BIKM (Library and Information Studies) - 81
credits
Entrance Qualifications
The normal requirements for entrance to the BIKM single
major degree shall be:
• Botswana General Certificate of Secondary
Education or equivalent. All candidates for
admission must have a minimum of credit
in English.
• A pass in the Diploma in Information 		

•

•

and Knowledge Management from this 		
university or its equivalent from any other
recognized institution.
Candidates with a Diploma in Library and 		
Information Studies, Archives and Records
Management and Knowledge Management
from the University of Botswana or its 		
equivalent from any other recognized 		
institution may be admitted directly to Level
300 of the programme.
Candidates with a Certificate in Library and
Information Studies, Archives and Records
Management, Information and Knowledge
from the University of Botswana or its 		
equivalent from any other recognized 		
institution may be admitted directly at Level
200 of the programme.

Semester 1
Core Courses
ARM100: Introduction to Records Management
(3 credits)
IKM100: Introduction to Knowledge Management
(3 credits)
LIM100: Introduction to Information Science
(3 credits)
LIM 101: Collection Development Management
(3 credits)
General Education
COM111: Communication and Study Skills I (3 credits)
ICT111:
Computing and Information Skills (2 Credits)
Semester 2
Core Courses
LIM102: Introduction to Organising Information
(4 credits)
IKM101: Knowledge Management Theory and
Practice (3 credits)
ARM101: Introduction to Archives (3 credits)
General Education
COM112: Communication and Study Skills II (3 credits)
ICT112:
Computing and Information Skills (2 credits)
Semester 3
Core Courses
LIM200: Digital Libraries (3 credits)
IKM200: Knowledge Management Systems (3 credits)
ISS221:
Data and Information Management 1
(3 credits)
Optional Courses
LIM201: Publishing and the Book Trade (3 credits)
Semester 4
Core Courses
LIM202:
Management of Library and Information
Systems (3 credits)
ARM200: Archival Arrangement and Description
(3 credits) (Pre–requisite: ARM101)
ARM201: Preservation of Information Materials
(3 credits)
Optional Courses
LIM203: Social Networking Issues for Information
Professionals (3 credits)
LIM204:
Information Literacy (3 credits)

Semester 5
Knowledge Management Stream Core Courses
ISS321:
Data and Information Management
(3 credits) (Pre-requisite: ISS221)
IKM300: Customer Knowledge Management
(3 credits)
IKM301: The Knowledge Economy (3 credits)
LIM300: User Needs and Services (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM 300: Vital Records and Disaster Planning
(3 credits)
LIM304: Information and Society (3 credits)
Library and Information Studies Stream Core Courses
ISS321:
Data and Information Management
(3 credits) (Pre-requisite: ISS221)
IKM300: Customer Knowledge Management
(3 credits)
IKM301: The Knowledge Economy (3 credits)
LIM300: User Needs and Services (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM300: Vital Records and Disaster Planning
(3 credits)
LIM304: Information and Society (3 credits)
Archives and Records Management Stream Core Courses
ISS321:
Data and Information Management
		
(3 credits)
ARM300: Vital Records and Disaster Planning
LIM300: User Needs and Services
Optional Courses
IKM 300: Customer Knowledge Management (3 credits)
IKM 301: The Knowledge Economy
Semester 6
Knowledge Management Stream Core Courses
IKM302: Research Methods in IKM (3 credits)
IKM303: Industrial Attachment (4 credits) (Prerequisites: ARM200, IKM200 and LIM200)
ARM301: Electronic Records Management (3 credits)
LIM301: Business Information Systems (3 credits)
Optional Courses
LIM302: Content Management (3 credits)
LIM303: Health Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM304:
Information and Society (3 credits)
Library and Information Studies Stream Core Courses
IKM302: Research Methods in IKM (3 credits)
IKM303: Industrial Attachment (4 credits) (Prerequisites: ARM200, IKM200 and LIM200)
LIM301: Business Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM302: Content Management (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM301: Electronic Records Management (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM100)
ARM302: Orality and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
(3 Credits)
LIM303: Health Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM304: Information and Society (3 credits)
Archives and Records Management Stream Core Courses
ARM301: Electronic Records Management (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM100)
ARM302: Orality and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
(3 credits)
IKM302: Research Methods in IKM (3 credits)
IKM303: Industrial Attachment (4 credits) (Pre-r
equisites: ARM200, IKM200 and LIM200)

138

Optional Courses
LIM301: Business Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM302: Content Management (3 credits)
LIM303: Health Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM304: Information and Society (3 credits)
Semester 7
Knowledge Management Stream Core Courses
IKM400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation (3 credits)
IKM401: Competitive Intelligence (3 credits)
LIM400: Project Management for Information
Professionals (3 credits)
LIM401: Marketing of Information Services (3 credits)
One elective course
Library and Information Studies Stream Core Courses
LIM400: Project Management for Information
Professionals (3 credits)
LIM401: Marketing of Information Services (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM400: Access and Reference Services (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM200)
IKM400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation (3 Credits)
IKM401: Competitive Intelligence (3 credits)
One elective course
Archives and Records Management Stream Core Courses
ARM400: Access and Reference Services (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM200)
LIM400: Project Management for Information
Professionals (3 credits)
LIM401: Marketing of Information Services (3 credits)
Optional Courses
IKM400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation (3 Credits)
IKM401: Competitive Intelligence (3 credits) One
elective course
One elective course
Semester 8
Knowledge Management Stream Core Courses
IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies (3 credits)
LIM402: Information Ethics, Legal and Policy Issues
(3credits)
LIM403: Project Work in Information and Knowledge
Management (4 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM402: Management of Records in Specialised
Environment (3 credits)
LIM404: Information Security (3 credits)
Library and Information Studies Stream Core Courses
LIM402:
Information Ethics, Legal and Policy Issues
(3credits)
LIM403: Project Work in Information and Knowledge
Management (4 credits)
LIM404: Information Security (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM401: Managing Audio Visual Archives (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM101)
ARM402: Management of Records in Specialised
Environments (3 credits)
IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies (3 credits)
Archives and Records Management Stream core Courses
ARM401: Managing Audio Visual Archives (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM101)
LIM402: Information Ethics, Legal and Policy Issues
(3credits)
LIM403:
Project Work in Information and 		
Knowledge Management (4 credits)

Optional Courses
ARM402: Management of Records in Specilaised
Environments (3 credits)
IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies (3 credits)
LIM 404: Information Security (3 credits)
Combined Major and Major/Minor
Special Regulations
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and Faculty of Humanities, the following
Departmental Regulations shall apply.
Entrance Qualifications
The normal requirements for entrance to the BA IKM
Combined Major and Major/Minor Degree Programme
are that applicants shall have the Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education or equivalent, with
credit in English. Those applicants who will major
in Social Sciences or Science subjects must obtain a
minimum credit in mathematics or Computer Science.
Programme Structure
The BA IKM is a full-time programme extending over
eight semesters in the single subject information and
knowledge and another subject leading to the award
of either a BA IKM Combined Major or BA IKM Major
Minor. Students pursuing a major in BIKM as part of
a Combined major are required to take a total of 60
credits from BIKM and those pursuing a Major-minor are
required to take 84 credits from the BIKM programme
shall consist of a minimum of 30 credits per year. All core
courses must be passed
The rest of the credits needed for the award of the BIKM
degree will be accumulated from optional courses, GECs
and electives
BA (IKM) - COMBINED MAJOR
Semester 1
Core Courses
ARM100: Introduction to Records Management (3
credits)
IKM100: Introduction to Knowledge Management (3
credits)
LIM100: Introduction to Information Science (3
credits)
Semester 2
Core Courses
LIM 102: Introduction to Organising Information (4
credits)
IKM 101: Knowledge Management Theory and
Practice (3 credits)
ARM101: Introduction to Archives (3 credits)
Semester 3
Core Courses
LIM200: Digital Libraries (3 credits)
ISS221: Data and Information Management 1 (3 credits)
Semester 4
Core Courses
LIM202: Management of Library and Information
Systems (3 credits)
ARM200: Archival Arrangement and Description (3
credits) (Pre –requisite: ARM101)
Semester 5
Core Courses
ISS321: Data and Information Management (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ISS221)

LIM300:

User Needs and Services (3 credits)

Semester 6
Core Courses
IKM302: Research Methods in IKM (3 credits)
IKM303: Industrial Attachment (4 credits) (Prerequisites: ARM200, IKM200 and LIM200)
Optional Courses
ARM301: Electronic Records Management (3 credits) (
Pre –requisite: ARM100)
ARM302: Orality and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
(3 credits)
LIM303: Health Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM304:
Information and Society (3 credits)
Semester 7
Core Courses
LIM400: Project Management for Information
Professionals (3 credits)
LIM401: Marketing of Information Services (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM400: Access and Reference Services (3 credits)
(Pre –requisite: ARM200)
IKM400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation (3 credits)
IKM 401: Competitive Intelligence (3 credits)
Semester 8
Core Courses
LIM402: Information Ethics, Legal and Policy Issues
(3credits)
LIM403: Project Work in Information and Knowledge
Management (4 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM401: Managing Audio Visual Archives (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM101)
RM402:
Management of Records in Specialised
Environments (3 credits)
IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies` (3 credits)
BA (IKM) - Major Major/Minor
Semester 1
Core Courses
ARM100: Introduction to Records Management
(3 credits)
IKM100: Introduction to Knowledge Management (3
credits)
LIM100: Introduction to Information Science (3
credits)
LIM101: Collection Development Management (3
credits)
Semester 2
Core Courses
LIM 102: Introduction to Organising Information (4
credits)
IKM 101: Knowledge Management Theory and
Practice (3 credits)
ARM101: Introduction to Archives (3 credits)
Semester 3
Core Courses
IKM200: Knowledge Management Systems (3 credits)
LIM200: Digital Libraries (3 credits)
ISS221:
Data and Information Management 1
(3 credits)
Semester 4
Core Courses
LIM202: Management of Library and Information
Systems (3 credits)

139

ARM200: Archival Arrangement and description (3
credits) (Pre–requisite: ARM101)
ARM201: Preservation of Information Materials (3
credits)
Semester 5
Core Courses
ARM300: Vital Records and Disaster Planning (3
credits)
IKM301: Knowledge Economy (3 credits)
ISS321:
Data and Information Management (3
credits) (Pre-requisite: ISS221)
LIM300: User Needs and Services (3 credits)
Semester 6
Core Courses
IKM302: Research Methods in IKM (3 credits)
IKM303: Industrial Attachment (4 credits) (Prerequisites: ARM200, IKM200 and LIM200)
ARM301: Electronic Records Management (3 credits)
(Pre –requisite: ARM100)
Optional Courses
ARM302: Orality and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
(3 credits)
LIM303: Health Information Systems (3 credits)
LIM304: Information and Society (3 credits)
Semester 7
Core Courses
ARM400: Access and Reference Services (3 credits)
(Pre–requisite: ARM200)
IKM400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation (3 Credits)
LIM400: Project Management for Information
Professionals (3 credits)
LIM401: Marketing of Information Services (3 credits)
Optional Courses
IKM401: Competitive Intelligence (3 credits)
IKM400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Semester 8
Core Courses
LIM402: Information Ethics, Legal and Policy Issues
(3credits)
LIM403: Project Work in Information and Knowledge
Management (4 credits)
LIM404: Information Security (3 credits)
Optional Courses
ARM401: Managing Audio Visual Archives (3 credits)
(Pre-requisite: ARM101)
ARM402: Management of Records in Specialised
Environments (3 credits)
IKM402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies` (3 credits)
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Courses for the Knowledge Management Stream
IKM 100: Introduction to Knowledge Management: The
course discusses the following: Concepts, Definition,
Origin, Nature and Types of Knowledge; Major Drivers
and Benefits of Knowledge Management; Organisational
Impacts of Knowledge Management; Various Knowledge
Processes with specific emphasis on knowledge sharing;
Knowledge Management Infrastructure and Different
Types of Knowledge Management Strategies; and
the Role of Information Technology in Knowledge
Management Endeavours.
IKM 101: Knowledge Management Theory and Practice:
The course discusses the following: Knowledge Creation
Model; Knowledge Artefacts; Knowledge Agents;
Content Management, Theoretical Framework for
Knowledge Management Process to Improve Knowledge
Performance; Diffusion of Knowledge; Communication;
and Leadership Subject Knowledge.

IKM 200: Knowledge Management Systems: The course
discusses the following: Origin, Evolution, and Role of
Knowledge Management Systems; Components of
a Knowledge Management System; Environmental
Scanning;
Developing Knowledge Management
System Blue Print; Prototyping and Deployment; Major
Knowledge Management Systems including Document
Management Systems, Decision Support Systems,
Group Support Systems, Executive Information Systems,
Workflow Management Systems; Conceptual and
Theoretical Frameworks on Integration of Systems in
Organizations’ Business Processes.
IKM 300: Customer Knowledge Management: The course
discusses the following: Importance and Effects of
Customer Knowledge Management in the Knowledge
Economy; Sources and Critical Success Factors of
Customer Knowledge Management; Role of Customers
in Knowledge Creation; Integrative Technologies;
Five Styles of Customer Knowledge Management;
an Integrated Approach to Customer Knowledge
Management.
IKM 301: Knowledge Economy: The course discusses
the following: Content Management, Major Tenets
of a Knowledge Economy; Harnessing and Synthesis
of Knowledge Resources into Different National
Socio-economic Value Chains for Competitiveness;
Environmental Scanning, Business Analysis, Market
Research, Marketing, Awareness of Current Affairs,
Knowledge of the Industry Trends.
IKM 302: Research Methods in Information and
Knowledge Management:
The purpose of the course is to introduce learners to
research methodologies in knowledge management.
Among topics to be covered will include: cognitive
maps, literature search, statistics, writing, qualitative
methods, mixed methods, good examples of information
and knowledge management research.
IKM 303: Industrial Attachment:
Placements are an integral part of the BIKM programme.
They are incorporated in the courses and earn credits.
During the third year of their study, students are
expected to undertake a six week up to a year’s
placement in industry to gain practical experience, assist
their academic learning and boost their employability
after graduating. Through the placements students
not only acquire skills as they put their knowledge into
practice but are also able to develop their career plans.
The placements are offered each year. All students are
supervised by a tutor from the school. All placements
are assessed on the basis of a written report, an oral
presentation during visitations and an assessment
report from the company.
IKM 400: Entrepreneurship and Innovation:
The course covers the following topics: Introduction
to Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Planning,
Development of Entrepreneurial and Innovative
Ventures, Foundations of Entrepreneurship, Techniques
for Creative Thinking, and Processes for Developing,
Planning and Launching a New Venture including
Protecting Intellectual Property, Evaluating Markets,
Developing Innovative Business Models, Budgeting,
and Raising Finance, Communication, Public Speaking,
Writing, Interpersonal/Group Skills, Time Management,
Business Analysis, Market Research, User Orientation,
Service Orientation, Customer Management, Customer
Service, Negotiation, Public Relations

in the Intelligence Cycle, Competitive Analysis and
Decision-making, Setting the Stage for the Brand,
(Porter/PESTEL), Understanding the Customers of
Analysis, Defining the Analysis Problem and Process,
Environmental Scanning.
IKM 402: Knowledge Management Strategies for
Information Agencies:
The course covers the following: Introduction to
Knowledge Management Strategies for Information
Agencies, An Overview of Strategic Planning and
Management in the Public Sector, Strategic Level,
Managerial and Supervisory Levels in Information
Agencies, Managing the Procurement of Information
Resources and Services, Managing People, Managing
ICT, Quality Management Issues; Security and Business
Continuity Issues, Policy and Strategy Issues; Legal
Issues, Organisation, Management and Co-ordination.
Courses for Archives and Records Management
Stream
ARM 100: Introductions to Records Management:
This course introduces students to managing records
as tools for good governance, accountability and
transparency, and effective decision making in ensuring
legislative and regulatory compliance and preserving
corporate memory of organizations. Topics to be covered
include: Definitions of Records, Records Management
Theories, Procedures for Managing Current (Developing
and Designing Classification and Records Tracking
Systems), Managing Semi-current (Records Retirement,
Application and Use Records Retention and Disposition
Schedules) and Managing Non-current Records,
ARM 101: Introduction to Archives:
The course introduces students to the practice of
managing archives as well as the role and place of
archives in society and organisations. Topics to be
covered include: Definitions and Terms used in Archives
Administration, the Nature of Archives, (Public, verses
Private Archives, Manuscripts Collections),the Role of
Archives in Society, Acquisition of Archives, Records
Appraisal, Macro and Micro appraisal, Accessioning,
Introduction to Arrangement and Description of
Archives.
ARM 102: Organisational Cultures and Archives and
Records Management:
This course introduces students to organisational
cultures and how they impact on processes in Archives
and Records Management. The topics to be covered
include: Introduction to Organisational Cultures, Factors
that Influence Organisational Cultures, Types and
Characteristics of Organisational Cultures, Assessing
Organisational Cultures and Promoting Information
Management in the Various Organisational Cultures
ARM 200: Archival Arrangement and Description:
This course explores the principles and practices
that underpin the arrangement and description of
archival collections. The topics to be covered include:
Arrangement and Description of Archives using the
Principles of Provenance and Original Order, Levels of
Arrangement, Arranging Records into Series, Preparation
of Administrative Notes, Other Types of Archival
Arrangement such as Chronological Arrangement,
Topographical Arrangement, and Arrangement by
Records Type. Alphabetical Arrangement, The Role of
Descriptive Standards in Facilitating Access to Archival
Materials, Preparation of Archival and Finding Aids.

IKM 401: Competitive Intelligence: The course covers:
Introduction to Competitive Intelligence, Components

140

ARM 201: Preservation of Information Materials:
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to
the measures required to prolong the useful life of
records, archives and other documentary materials and
to ensure that they remain accessible over time. The
topics to be covered include: History of Paper and Paper
Making, Preservation and Conservation, Nature and
Quality of Materials; Agents of Deterioration – Physical,
Mechanical, Biological, Chemical, Damage, Collection
Care, Disaster Management and Disaster Preparedness,
Preservation Planning Programmes, Policies and
Procedures, National and International Preservation
Organizations
ARM 300: Vital Records and Disaster Planning:
The course aims at equipping students with skills for
the management of vital records and development
and implementation of records disaster plans. Topics
to be covered include: Types of Disasters -Natural
and Man-made, Identification of Potential Disasters
and Risks Assessment in Organisations, Selection and
Identification of Vital Records, Copying and Duplication
of Vital Records, Onsite and Offsite Storage Facilities,
Disaster Planning, Response and Recovery, Formulation
of Disaster Preparedness Policies and Procedures and
National Disaster Management Strategies.
ARM 301: Electronic Records Management:
This course introduces students to the management of
electronic records. It provides the skills and knowledge
needed to manage electronic records throughout the
records lifecycle, and to take steps required to transition
from a paper to an electronic records environment.
Topics to be covered include: The Nature of Electronic
Records, Understanding the Concepts of Electronic
Records Management, Preserving Electronic Records in
a Trusted Digital Environment, Planning and Managing
an Electronic Records Management Programme,
Managing the Creation, Use and Disposal of Electronic
Records, Opportunities and Challenges of ERM Planning;
Technological and Organisation Context of ERM and
Managing an ERM Programme.
ARM 302: Orality and Indigenous Knowledge Systems:
The course introduces students to oral traditions and
indigenous knowledge systems, their role in society and
their capture and management. Topics to be covered
include: Role of Oral Traditions in African societies,
Colonial Interpretations of the African Past, Role of
Archivist and Archival Institutions in Collection and
Preservation of Oral Tradition, Forms of Oral Traditions
(including story-telling, song and performance), Oral
Traditions and Written Records, Oral Traditions and the
Media, New Approaches to Collecting and Documenting
Oral Traditions (including transcription; video and
video representation), Oral Traditions in the Electronic
Age, Training (skills) in Conducting Fieldwork, Ethical
Considerations in Fieldwork, and Problems associated
with Oral Traditions.
ARM 400: Access and Reference Services:
This course will cover archival concepts and principles
and their impact on archival access. The topics to be
covered include: Principles governing access to archives,
Search Room Layout, Design and Equipment, Retrieval
Processes and Procedures, Administering Archival
Reference Programmes. Types and Uses of Archival
Finding Aids; Archival Ethics, Protecting and Preserving
Archives while Administering Access, Legal Issues
and Related Concerns in Access to Archival Records,
Marketing and Promotion of Archival Services.

ARM 401: Managing Audio Visual Archives:
The course introduces students to the management of
various types of audio visual archives including but
not limited to still pictures, motion pictures and sound
recordings. This course will cover the Types and Nature
of Audio-visual Records, The Importance of Audio-visual
Materials to Society, History, Handling and Storage
of Films, Photography, Video, CDs, DVDs, Maps and
Plans, Works of Art, Appraisal and Selection of Sound
Records, Handling and Storage Requirement for Sound
Recordings, Evaluating Audio-visual and Television
Archives.
ARM 402: Management of Records in Specialised
Environments:
This course introduces students to the management
of records in special environments including but not
limited to human resources, land, security, medical, and
judicial. Topics to be covered include: Characteristics
of Records in Specialised Environments; Legislative
Requirements for Managing Records in Specialised
Environments, Identification of Records Requirements
for these Records; Development and Implementation of
Retention Schedules Specific to these Records.
Courses for the Library and Information Studies Stream
		
LIM 100: Introduction to Information Science: This
course provides an introduction to the nature of
information science, information architecture and
general principles that underlie information processing
and information theory. It will cover topics such
as: Definitions of Information Science; Information
Architecture; Human Computer Interaction, Models of
Information Retrieval, Information Systems Analysis;
Organisational Informatics; IT and Organisations and
Knowledge Management.
LIM 101: Collection Development and Management:
This course examines how libraries build and maintain
collections. It introduces students to the concept of
collection development and management in library and
information centres as well as expose them to various
reference sources in print and electronic format; general
and subject specific reference sources. Focus will be on
Selection of Materials, Producers of Materials, Weeding,
Budgeting and Censorship.. Content will also include
what to consider when developing collections, User
Needs, Collection Evaluation, and Collection Policies.
LIM 102: Introduction to Organising Information: The
course aims at introducing students to the principles
underlying the organization of data and information
sources. Students will be taken through the theory and
practice of cataloguing and classification. It is expected
that students would be able to catalogue different types
of information carriers at the end of the course.
LIM 200: Digital Libraries: The course is designed to give
the students an overview of digital libraries and their
role in the information or digital era. Content covers:
Conceptual, Practical and Technical Issues, Problems
and Approaches to Digital Libraries, Overview of
Differing Efforts, and Evolving Concepts and Thinking
in a Number of Fields and Enterprises, Types of Digital
Library Collections, Organization, Access and Use of
Digital Libraries, Technical Infrastructure and Processes
for Building Digital Libraries, Research Projects, such as
Digital Libraries Initiatives, Social and Economic Issues,
Integration of Digital and Traditional Resources in
Libraries.

LIM 201: Publishing and the Book Trade:
The publishing industry underpins the work of librarians
and how it operates has implications for how librarians
work, and of course, what items they stock in their
libraries. The course considers the relationship between
libraries and the book trade together with three
areas of the law (Copyright, Public Lending Right and
Censorship) which affect both libraries and the trade.
It studies each step of the publishing process, the role
of marketing and how books are promoted and the
different types of publishers, including issues related to
electronic publishing. Additionally, the course examines
the publishing industry in the SADC countries as well as
the role of women’s publishers today.
LIM 202: Management of Library and Information
Systems:
The course covers the structure and components of
management systems for library and information service
providers and creators. Content includes: Management
Information Systems and Packages for Transaction
Processing and Decision Support; Expert Systems,
Artificial Intelligence and Strategies for providing
Successful Management Information.
LIM 203: Social Networking for Information Professionals:
This course will explore the concept, theory and practice
of social media and social networking technologies
within the context of libraries and work of information
professionals, with a particular focus on Library 2.0
and participatory library service. This subject requires
students to immerse themselves within a range of social
networking environments, including the use of Facebook,
IM, YouTube, Blogs, Wikis, Social Bookmarking, Flickr,
and Second Life, and evaluate their learning experiences
throughout the session as both social networker and
information professional. The subject will also introduce
students to emerging and social networking issues
LIM 204: Information Literacy:
The course will equip students with knowledge to
understand and define information literacy theories
and models, information seeking behaviour, as well
as the role and purpose of cognitive skills such as
recognition of relevance, analysis, synthesis, induction,
deduction, evaluation, and thinking processes such as
defining a problem. The course will also equip students
with problem-solving strategies which should be
instrumental in imparting the knowledge of utilizing
new and unique sources of information, as well as
embracing emerging information literacy standards
which promote life-long learning skills. These skills are
embodied in the various information literacy models
and theories which will form part of the course.
LIM 300: User Needs and Services:
The general purpose of this course is to enable students
to understand the theory, principles, and techniques
underlying information use and seeking behaviour
with special emphasis on applying user-centred
approaches. The content covers; Definition, Basic
Concepts and History of User Study, Types of Users, User
Studies and Human Information Behaviour, Models of
Information Seeking Behaviour, Different Information
Seeking Behaviour, User-centred Design, Information
and Poverty and Everyday Life Information Seeking
Behaviour, Community Information Needs and Services,
Evaluation of Reference and Information Services.
LIM 301: Business Information Systems:
The course presents the concepts, principles, issues, and
techniques for managing corporate data resources;
techniques for managing design and the development

141

of information systems. The content covers: Definitions
of Information Systems, Philosophy of IS Department,
Approaches to Understanding IS Phenomenon, Survey
of Information Systems Technology, Strategies for
IS Design, the Decision-making Process, Concepts of
Information, System Concepts, Organizational Structure
and Management Concepts.
LIM 302: Content Management
The course exposes students to the principles of data
organization using advanced techniques of developing
indexes and abstract that will guide user to locate
information carriers in a collection. The main areas of
focus will include: Introduction to Data/Information
Organization, Data/Information Organization using
Metadata and Data Dictionary (Types of Metadata,
Functions of Metadata, etc); Indexing Methods and
Procedures, Pre-coordination and Post-coordination in
Indexing and Quality of Indexes, Introduction to Abstract
and Abstracting (Overview and Theory of Abstracting,
Types of Abstracts, Principles and Procedures of
Abstracting, Determining Aboutness in Documents for
Abstracting).
LIM 303: Health Information Systems:
The course is IT-oriented, designed to prepare Information
Management students for health care IT related
roles e.g. as users, managers, designers and evaluators
of Health Information Systems. It will consider the
Rationale for Establishing Health Information Systems,
the Role of ICT in Health Care (Computer based
Information Systems); Life Cycle Phases of Health
Information System, Human and Implementation Issues
in IHS, and Professional Code of Ethics. It will also look
into special problems facing the African continent in
providing health information for professionals as well as
information for consumers of health.
LIM 304: Information and Society:
Technology plays an increasingly important role in
today’s global society. In this course, the impact and
significance of the information age is explored in
several social contexts including economic, political,
cultural, legal, environmental, historical, ergonomic, and
psychological. The course covers the technical, moral,
ethical, and legal challenges of information access
and use. The course covers MDGs and Information;
Universal Access, Universal Services, Open Access;
Internet Regulation, Legislation, Legal Cases and Issues,
Internet and Democracy: Governmental Transparency
and Citizens’ Political Participation, Using and Misusing
the Internet, Who is Afraid of the Internet, Privacy
and Security, WSIS, Digital Solidarity Fund, AISI, ICT
Infrastructure Development in Africa, Africa e-Schools
Project and e-Europe.
LIM 400: Project Management for Information
Professionals:
This course provides students with an overview of project
management as it relates to projects undertaken in
today’s libraries, archives and information/IT sectors. It
also provides an introduction to project management
theory and practice, with an emphasis on the practical
skills required to work successfully within a teambased environment. The course will sensitize students
on concepts of project management and project
management techniques and software. The following
are some of the topics that are covered under this
course; Introduction to Project Management, the
Project Life Cycle, Working with Project Teams, Tools and
Processes for Project Management, Communication,
Decision-making, Risk and Evaluation.

LIM 401: Marketing of Information Products and
Services:
The course teaches students the skills needed in the
design, packaging and customisation of information
products and services. It also aims at equipping students
with strategies and techniques of marketing information
products and services.
LIM 402: Legal, Ethical and Policy Issues in Information
Management:
This course exposes students to some of the legal,
ethical and policy issues in information management. It
covers: Definition of Concepts, Ethics, Legislation, Policy;
Overview of Ethical Theories and how they inform agency
policies and practices. It examines selected policy issues
relating to information and communications: Copyright,
Intellectual Property, Privacy, Censorship, Equity of
Access, Freedom of Access, Professional Liability, and
other issues; Legal Implications and Safeguards; Issues
and Challenges faced in developing and implementing
policies within organizations and companies.
LIM 403: Project Work in Information and Knowledge
Management: This is an independent study to be carried
out by each student under an assigned supervisor. It
aims at making students apply knowledge gained in the
Bachelor of Information and Knowledge Management
(LIS option) to solving a particular problems in selected
libraries or information centres.
LIM 404: Information Security:
The purpose of this course is to provide the students
with contemporary and emerging perspectives on
information security management. Students are
expected to build a picture of what information security
management is, form a view as to the purposes of
information security management and recognize the
benefits it can bring to an organization. Students will
be introduced to the following topics: Secure Programs
and Programming, Operating System Security, Data and
Information Security, Cryptography and its applications,
PKI, AES, RSA, Harsh Key Management, Analysis of
Kerbelos and other protocols, Network and Internet
Security, Access Control, Security and Risk Management,
Security Under Constraints, Security Economics, Privacy
and Management of Sensitive Data, Legal and Ethical
Considerations, and Security in Information Sensitive
Environments.
Job Opportunities for BIKM Graduates
BIKM majors have the possibility to work in positions
such as: knowledge manager; knowledge project
manager; knowledge analyst; data analyst; data
manager; internal communications manager; knowledge
leader; information manager; records manager; web
manager; information specialist; information consultant;
information analyst; internet and intranet expert;
indexer; information and knowledge manager; business
analyst;
end-user support specialist; information
systems manager; project manager; systems analyst;
company/corporate archivist and web content manager.

DEPARTMENT OF MEDIA
STUDIES
The Department of Media Studies in the Faculty of
Humanities is the national leader in the delivery
of training in media studies, television and radio
broadcasting, digital media production, print and
electronic journalism, public Relations and integrated

communication. The Department currently offers three
undergraduate degrees: Bachelor of Media Studies
(Revised), Bachelor of Digital Media (new) and Bachelor
of Public Relations and Integrated Communication
(new).
1.0 Entrance Requirements
1.0.1 The normal minimum entrance requirements for
all Media Studies undergraduate degrees shall be the
Botswana BGCSE or the equivalent with credit in English
and in three other subjects.
1.0.2
Candidates who fulfill Regulation 1.0.1, have
a credit in English and work experience in Media are
preferred.
1.0.3
Candidates who do not meet Regulation
1.0.1 but have the BGCSE or equivalent and the
certificate in Media and Communication or its equivalent
from a recognized institution may be admitted directly
to Level 100 of the Programme.
1.0.4
Candidates with a Diploma in Media and
Communication or its equivalent from a recognized
institution may be admitted to Level 200 of the
programme.
1.0.5
Candidates with an Associate Degree in
Media and Communication or its equivalent from a
recognized institution may be admitted to Level 300 of
the programme, but may be required to take lower level
courses specified in their admission letter.
1.2
Assessment
Assessment shall be as per General Academic Regulation
00.8
1.2.1
There will be variations in the mode of
assessment in order to allow for more flexibility.
1.2.2
A Student shall undergo a total of 6 months
of supervised Industrial Attachment: 3 of these shall be
internal within Media Studies Projects (working in UB
newspaper, radio and television), and the other 3 months
shall be spent in external placement.
1.2.3
During attachment, a student performance
will be assessed by means of a visit by University of
Botswana Supervisor. A student at the end of the
industrial training shall submit an attachment report and
logbook.
1.3 Progression From one Semester to the Next
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as per
General Regulation 00.9
1.4 Award of Degree
The award of the degree shall be as per General
Regulations 00.8

BACHELOR OF MEDIA STUDIES (BMS)

The Bachelor of Media Studies (BMS) that has been
taught since 2002 until 2020 has now been phased out
and replaced with a revised BMS. The revised programme
will equip students with journalism and broadcasting
practice skills, as well as theoretical knowledge in
media studies. With the concept of fact-centred media
production, news reporting and storytelling as its
nucleus, the BMS graduates will develop knowledge
and skills necessary to produce great and quality

142

stories across multimedia platforms for local and global
audience. The areas of concentration in the revised BMS
include journalism, broadcasting and media studies. The
programme is available as a single major, and as part of a
double major, or major/minor within the BA (Humanities)
combination.
2.0 Career Opportunities
The Bachelor of Media Studies programme prepare
graduates for a variety of career opportunities in media,
journalism and broadcasting fields, such as newspapers,
radio, television and new media.
2.1 Programe Structure
The Bachelor of Media Studies is a full-time
programme extending over eight semesters. The total
minimum credits required to complete the programme
is 124 and all students are expected to complete all the
required GEC (10 credits), Language (6 credits), Cores
(84 credits), other optional courses (15 credits) and
electives courses (9 credits). Students will be expected
to take between one and four BMS courses per semester
to reach the minimum and maximum number of credits
required to graduate. Part-time study for the Degree
is also possible. It is expected that part-time students
would finish the course work in not more than ten
semesters.
2.1.1 GEC and Electives
In accordance with General Regulations 00.619 and
00.620, a student must during the first two semesters at
the University register for at least 10 general educations
courses and in addition must register a minimum of an
additional nine credits of elective or general education
courses.
2.1.2 In Levels 2 (2nd semester), 3 and 4 of the
programme, three specialized streams will be offered:
a) Journalism
b) Radio Broadcasting
c) Television Broadcasting
Level 1 Semester 1
BMS110 History of World Media (3) CORE
BMS111
Media in Botswana (3) CORE
COM111 Communication & Academic Literacy Skills 1
(3) CORE
ICT111
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2) CORE
ENG121 Introduction to English Language, 		
Description & Usage (3) CORE
ALC121
Introduction to the Study of Language &
Linguistics (3) OPTIONAL
CHN105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1 (3) OPTIONAL
ENG113
Introduction to Literature and Prose (3)
OPTIONAL
FRE217
French Language 1 (3) OPTIONAL
17 CREDITS
Level 1 Semester 2
BMS 112 Introduction to Media Technology (3) CORE
BMS 113 Theories of Mass Communication (3) CORE
COM112 Communication & Academic Literacy Skills
11 (3) CORE
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2) CORE
ENG131 Writing in English (3) CORE
ALC141
Introduction to Oral Literature & Indigenous
Knowledge (3) OPTIONAL
CHN106 Basic Practical Mandarin 11 (3) OPTIONAL
ENG123 Introduction to Literature, Drama & Poetry
(3) OPTIONAL

FRE227
French Language 11 (3) OPTIONAL
17 CREDITS

Course Offerings
ENG 121 Introduction to English Language,

Level 2 Semester 3
BMS221 Introduction to Journalism (3) CORE
BMS222 Introduction to Broadcasting (3) CORE
BMS224 Introduction to Film and Video (3) CORE
BDM206 Desktop Publishing (3) OPTIONAL
BMS237 Television Studio Directing & Producing (3)
OPTIONAL
BMS246 Interviewing Techniques in Broadcast Media
(3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS

Description & Usage
This course provides an overview of basic grammatical
concepts and terms that students can apply to particular
examples and difficulties of usage.

Level 2 Semester 4
BDM210 Digital Photography (3) CORE
BMS226 Ethics for Media Professionals (3) CORE
BMS229 Basics of Video Production (3) CORE
BMS236 Multimedia Journalism (3) OPTIONAL
BMS247 Television News Writing & Production (3)
OPTIONAL
BMS248 Radio News Writing & Production (3)
OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Level 3 Semester 5
BMS320 Media & Society (3) CORE
BMS321 Media Law (3) CORE
BMS340 Sound Design (3) CORE
BMS342 Special Topics in Media (3) CORE
BMS345 Reporting Health, Science and Technology
(3) OPTIONAL
BMS347 Television Magazine Script Writing &
Production (3) OPTIONAL
BMS348 Radio Magazine Writing & Production (3)
OPTIONAL
15 CREDITS
Level 3 Semester 6
BMS328 Communication Research Methods (3) CORE
BMS341 Media Practice 1 (6) CORE
BMS343 Introduction to Data Driven Journalism (3)
CORE
BMS332 Beat Reporting (3) OPTIONAL
BMS357 Television Entertainment Shows (3)
OPTIONAL
BMS358 Educational Broadcasting (3) OPTIONAL
15 CREDITS

Level 4 Semester 7
BMS421 Current Issues in African Media (3) CORE
BMS441 Media Project / Dissertation 1 (3) CORE
BMS442 Media Practice 2 (6) CORE
BMS423 Investigative Journalism (3) OPTIONAL
BMS425 Television Drama, Writing & Production (3)
OPTIONAL
BMS424 Radio Drama, Writing & Production (3)
OPTIONAL
15 CREDITS
Level 4 Semester 8
BMS 451 Media Project / Dissertation 2 (6) CORE
BMS 443 P rogramming and Station Management (3)
CORE
BMS429 Media Management & Entrepreneurship (3)
CORE
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS

ENG 113 Introduction to Literature & Prose
This course is designed to introduce first year students
to the literary aspects of the essay and (auto) biography,
and to the structure and components of the novel and
short story.
FRE 217 French Language 1
This course is designed to develop students’ competence
in spoken and written French so as they have a more
spontaneous use of the French language. Emphasis
will be laid on mastering basic language functions and
linguistic structures for effective expression in both
written and verbal French. The content of this course
will cover practical exercises both oral and written in the
classroom and in the language laboratory.
CHN 105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1
This is a beginners’ course for learners with no prior
knowledge of Mandarin Chinese language. It introduces
students to basic features of Mandarin including
the phonetic system and grammatical system. The
course helps students acquire a basic vocabulary of
around 400 Chinese words and master expressions of
everyday language use. The emphasis is on listening
comprehension and oral skills.
ALC 121 Introduction to Oral Literature & Indigenous
Knowledge
The course includes the study of human language and its
significance in human life. It also deals with linguistics
as a linguistic approach to the study of language,
the branches of linguistics, how it is related to other
disciplines and how linguistics can be applied to some
professions.
BMS 110 History of World Media
A brief history of world media from the invention of
writing through to the Internet and other 21st century
developments. The course will also look at some of the
major social impacts of media development through the
ages..
BMS 111 Media in Botswana
A brief survey of media in Botswana, including indigenous
communication techniques, and showing links to media
in the region and globally. A survey of current media
houses, trends and genres in Botswana is included.
ENG 131 Writing in English
This course familiarizes students with various rhetorical
principles and examines various features of discourse
types specific to particular genres.
ENG 123 Introduction to Literature, Drama & Poetry
This course introduces students to the literary and
theatrical aspects of drama, and the structure and
literary strategies of poetry.
FRE 227 French Language 2
This course is a follow-up to FRE217. It aims at developing
learners’ ability to use the French language efficiently
in a practical way. It incorporates more advanced
language structures and functions with emphasis on
conversational skills. There will be language activities
related to all four skills- reading, writing, listening and

143

speaking. – that will enable learners to understand and
communicate in the spoken and written language for
practical purposes.
CHN 106 Basic Practical Mandarin 2
The course is for students who have completed Basic
Practical Mandarin 2. The course teaches skills of
reception (reading and listening) and production
(speaking and writing) in Mandarin Chinese at basic level.
In this course, students are expected to start acquiring
basic translation skills from Mandarin into English.
ALC 141 Introduction to the Study of Language &
Linguistics
The course will generally include a description and
analysis of various genres of African oral literature
and the role of indigenous knowledge in sustainable
development. It is basically an introduction to the
multi-faceted nature of African of oral literature and
indigenous knowledge.
BMS 112 Introduction to Media Technology
An introduction to communication principles followed
by a survey and simple explanation of the major
technologies used in the 21st century media.
BMS 113 Theories of Mass Communication
This course is a brief survey of media in Botswana
including indigenous communication techniques, and
showing links to media in the region and the wider
world. A survey of current media houses, trends and
genres in Botswana is included.
BDM 206 Desk Top Publishing
This course is designed to introduce students to a range
of layout and publishing techniques used in digital
environments. Learning involves the use of basic desktop
publishing computer applications to produce basic
designs for print, and online environments.
BMS 221 Introduction to Journalism
This is mainly practical course on the basic requirements
of pre-production, production and post-production in
the making of video films.
BMS 222 Introduction to Broadcasting
A survey of radio and television industries, including a
description of the whole production process and the
main requirements of a broadcaster, the associated
regulatory frameworks, broadcast standards and various
broadcast systems
BMS 224 Introduction to Film & Video
This is a survey of the history of world film, from silent
movies through to the digital age, including the major
production methods.
BMS 237 Television Studio Directing & Producing
This course is designed to foster learning experiences
in the basics of both behind and in front of the camera
productions. Multiple-camera studio production is a
staple of the television broadcast industry, where shows
such as sitcoms, soaps, drama, music performance,
political debates and children’s programming are either
produced live, live-to-tape, or tapes for sequential
dissemination in episodes.
BMS 246 Interviewing Techniques for Broadcast Media
This is a practical course in the techniques of interviewing
and presentation for electronic media, particularly radio
and television

jargon, science, and new and digital technology.
BDM 210 Digital Photography
This is a practical course that introduces students to the
art of photography and the creation and production of
digital images. Students are introduced to still digital
cameras, lighting techniques, camera functions, and
editing to photographs. More emphasis is placed on
framing of shots, electronic imaging and production of
portraits, and outdoor photography practices.
BMS 226 Ethics for Media Professionals
The course focuses in the analysis of theoretical issues
concerning media ethics and their practical application
in various case studies of media within Botswana and
beyond
BMS 229 Basics of Video Production
This is mainly a practical course on the basic requirements
of pre-production, production and post-production in
the making of video films.
BMS 236 Multimedia Journalism
Preparation of material for multimedia publishing;
this includes streaming of video and audio content,
formatting images and text, and web-programming.
BMS 247 Television News Writing and Production
The course introduces students to the art of writing
broadcast news stories for television. Students will be
exposed to the structure of a news story, the techniques
used in writing for the ear and the eye, as well as learning
how to narrate the stories for broadcast.
BMS 248 Radio News Writing and Production
The course introduces students to the art of writing
broadcast news stories for radio and. Students will be
exposed to the structure of a news story, the techniques
used in writing for the ear, as well as learning how to
narrate the stories for radio broadcasts.
BMS 320 Media & Society
A theoretical course analyzing the way media represents
various groups and the way media impact upon society.
BMS 321 Media Law
The course is a survey of regulations and laws relevant
to journalism, broadcasting and telecommunications,
and new media, with case studies to illustrate their
application.
BMS 340 Sound Design
This is a practical course aimed at training students on an
array of audio editing techniques for film, music and new
media. Students also explore techniques of recording,
mixing, processing, sampling analysis and editing of
digital audio using computer software.
BMS 342 Special Topics in Media
In this course, students study special topics that take
center stage in the public media, both local and global:
radio, television, newspapers and new media forms; week
in week out, to explore trends and practices in writing
and reporting on those topics. Experienced journalists
will be invited from time to time to lead discussions on
these topics.
BMS 345 Reporting Health, Science & Technology
This is a largely self-directed course that introduces
students to methods and approaches in reporting health,
science and technology. It will acquaint students with
various domains of such reporting including public and
community health, the business of health, health policy,
reporting on drugs and disease, reporting on technical

BMS 347 Television Magazine Script Writing &
Production
In this course, students are introduced to writing and
techniques for producing television magazine. Learners
will develop mastery of the production processes and
recording techniques used in the creation of the short
and long magazine programme. At the end of this
course, it is expected that learners will produce high
quality exciting and content-rich magazine programmes
suitable for broadcast on broadcast television.
BMS 348 Radio Magazine Script Writing & Production
This course will introduce learners to an important
programme format in radio production; the radio
magazine. Learners will develop mastery of the
production processes and recording techniques used
in the creation of the long magazine programme. At
the end of this course, it is expected that learners will
produce high quality exciting and content-rich magazine
programmes suitable broadcast on the University’s online
radio channel.
BMS 328 Communication Research Methods
An intensive course explaining the principles of research
and useful quantitative and qualitative media research
methodologies. This course prepares students for project/
dissertation courses (BMS 441 and BMS 451).
BMS 332 Beat Reporting
Preparation of material for online publishing; Skills
development include streaming video and audio content,
formatting images and text and online programming.
BMS 341 Media Practice 1
In this course, students are exposed studio work where
they develop skills and demonstrate competencies
working towards producing and publishing media
content. Course and assessment linked to Media studies
projects (radio, TV and newspaper).
BMS 343 Introduction to Data Driven Journalism
In this course, students use open source applications,
public records, computer assisted journalism and
databases to mine, process and analyze data. Students
BMS 357 Television Entertainment Shows
Production of entertainment programmes such as game
talk shows, and music shows for television or video.
BMS 358 Educational Broadcasting
Students learn to produce educational programs for
both television and radio. Emphasis will be on producing
for the ear and screen, and learning include timing
programmes, programming and scheduling for radio and
television broadcasts.
BMS 421 Current Issues in African Media
The course will provide an overview of current issues
affecting African media including the press or broadcast
organizations that influence the media
BMS 423 Investigative Journalism
This course provides in-depth, carefully researched,
critical journalism for print or broadcast media.
BMS 424 Radio Drama, Writing and Production
This course will introduce learners to an important
programme format in radio production: the radio
magazine. Learners will develop mastery of the
production processes, recording and editing techniques
used in the creation of the long magazine programme.

144

BMS 425 Television Drama, Writing and Production
This course will introduce learners to an important
programme format in television production: TV
magazine. Learners will develop mastery of the
production processes, recording and editing techniques
used in the creation of the long magazine programme.
BMS 441 Media Project / Dissertation 1
This course is linked to BMS 328. It is the start of a media
project that may be theoretical research or a practical
media artifact that shows the student has acquired the
skills of using media techniques for communication.
Assessment includes the production of a proposal for
project/dossier.
BMS 442 Media Practice 2
This course is the second internal internship practice
through which students are exposed to studio work
where they develop further skills and competences
working towards producing and publishing media
content. Student enrolled in this course are placed for a
minimum of two months for media roles in government
and private organizations where they experience the
work environment.
BMS 429 Media Management & Entrepreneurship
A practical and theoretical course on how management
/ organizational issues in the media relate to the wider
economic landscape. Students enrolled in this course
also explore media ownership, leadership practices in the
media, and project management for media projects.
BMS 443 Programming and Station Management
This course focuses on how to design short and longterm programme schedules for radio, television and the
Internet. The course engages with both theoretical and
practical aspects of broadcast scheduling. Moreover,
it prepares the learner for managerial tasks in station
management.
BMS 451 Media Project Dissertation 2
The course is linked to BMS 328 and BMS 441. Students
enrolled in the course are expected to independently
produce a practical media artifact /or dissertation
(minimum 40 000 words) to demonstrate they have
acquired skills, knowledge and competences to plan,
produce and read media. Assessment also includes the
production/execution of a media project/dossier.
BACHELOR OF DIGITAL MEDIA (BDM)
The BDM program is designed to equip learners with
a mixture of theory and practice necessary for a
successful professional career in the digital and creative
media industry. The key streams in BDM programme
include digital video/film, computer animation and
communication design. Students enrolled in this program
will develop theoretical and practical knowledge, skills
and competency in the areas of digital film directing and
producing, interactive multimedia, computer animation,
communication design, new media research, media law
and ethics.
3.0 Career Opportunities
The Bachelor of Digital Media prepare graduates for a
variety of career opportunities multimedia industries
such as; app and mobile design, computer animation,
visual effects, sound design, communication/graphics
design, film producing and directing, video editing,
cinematography and interactive media including web
design and development, DVD authoring, and interactive
CDROM.

3.1 Programe Structure
The Bachelor of Media Studies is a full-time programme
extending over eight semesters. The total minimum
credits required to complete the programme is 124 and
all students are expected to complete all the required
GEC (10 credits), Language (6 credits), Cores (84 credits),
other optional courses (15 credits) and electives courses
(9 credits). Students will be expected to take between
one and four BMS courses per semester to reach the
minimum and maximum number of credits required to
graduate. Part-time study for the Degree is also possible.
It is expected that part-time students would finish the
course work in not more than ten semesters.
3.1.1 GEC and Electives
In accordance with General Regulations 00.619 and
00.620, a student must during the first two semesters at
the University register for at least 10 general educations
courses and in addition must register a minimum of an
additional nine credits of elective or general education
courses.
3.1.2 In Levels 2 (2nd semester), 3 and 4 of the
programme, three specialized streams will be offered:
a) Digital Film/Video
b) Communication Design
c) Computer Animation
Level 1 Semester 1
BDM110 Basics of Digital Media (3) CORE
BDM111 Creative Industries & the Arts (3) CORE
COM111 Communication & Academic Literacy Skills 1
(3) CORE
ICT111
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (3) CORE
ENG121 Introduction to English Language, 		
Description & Usage (3) CORE
ALC121
Introduction to the Study of Language &
Linguistics (3) OPTIONAL
CHN105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1 (3) OPTIONAL
ENG113
Introduction to Literature and Prose (3)
OPTIONAL
FRE217
French Language 1 (3) OPTIONAL
17 CREDITS
Level 1 Semester 2
BDM112 Visual Literacy (3) CORE
BMS113 Theories of Mass Communication (3) CORE
COM112 Communication & Academic Literacy Skills
11 (3) CORE
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (3) CORE
ENG131 Writing in English (3) CORE
ALC141
Introduction to Oral Literature & Indigenous
Knowledge (3) OPTIONAL
CHN106 Basic Practical Mandarin 11 (3) OPTIONAL
ENG123 Introduction to Literature, Drama & Poetry
(3) OPTIONAL
FRE227
French Language 11 (3) OPTIONAL
17 CREDITS
Level 2 Semester 3
BDM201 Concept Development & Design (3) CORE
BDM203 Screen Writing (3) CORE
BMS224 Introduction to Film and Video (3) CORE
BDM204 Cinematography (3) OPTIONAL
BDM205 2D Animation (3) OPTIONAL
BDM206 Desktop Publishing (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Level 2 Semester 4
BDM210 Digital Photography (3) CORE
BMS226 Ethics for Media Professionals (3) CORE
BMS229 Basics of Video Production (3) CORE
BDM214 Video & Film Documentary (3) OPTIONAL

BDM215 Visual Effects (3) OPTIONAL
BDM216 Graphics Design (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS

linguistic structures for effective expression in both
written and verbal French. The content of this course
will cover practical exercises both oral and written in the
classroom and in the language laboratory.

Level 3 Semester 5
BMS320 Media & Society (3) CORE
BMS321 Media Law (3) CORE
BMS340 Sound Design (3) CORE
BDM304 Music Video Production (3) OPTIONAL
BDM305 3D Computer Animation 1 (3) OPTIONAL
BDM306 Design For Interactive Media 1 (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS

CHN 105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1
This is a beginners’ course for learners with no prior
knowledge of Mandarin Chinese language. It introduces
students to basic features of Mandarin including
the phonetic system and grammatical system. The
course helps students acquire a basic vocabulary of
around 400 Chinese words and master expressions of
everyday language use. The emphasis is on listening
comprehension and oral skills.

Level 3 Semester 6
BMS328 Communication Research Methods (3) CORE
BMS341 Media Practice 1 (6) CORE
BMS337 Cinema Language in World Film (3) OPTIONAL
BMS335 Motion Graphics (3) OPTIONAL
BDM316 Application & Mobile Design (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS

ALC 121 Introduction to Oral Literature & Indigenous
Knowledge
The course includes the study of human language and its
significance in human life. It also deals with linguistics
as a linguistic approach to the study of language,
the branches of linguistics, how it is related to other
disciplines and how linguistics can be applied to some
professions.

Level 4 Semester 7
IKM400
Entrepreneurship & Innovation (3) CORE
BMS441 Media Project / Dissertation 1 (3) CORE
BMS442 Media Practice 2 (6) CORE
BDM404 Film Directing & Producing (3) OPTIONAL
BDM405 3D Computer Animation 2 (3) OPTIONAL
BDM406 Design for Interactive Media (3) OPTIONAL
15 CREDITS

BDM 112 Visual Literacy
This course incorporates communication theory, design
and history of art to provide the basic fundamental
principles of effective visual communication. Students
will develop the ability to learn visually, and to think
creatively to solve problems.

Level 4 Semester 8
IKM411
Managing Audio Visual Archives (3) CORE
BMS451 Media Project / Dissertation 2 (6) CORE
BMS429 Media Management & Entrepreneurship (3)
CORE
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Course Listings
ENG 121 Introduction
to
English
Language,
Description & Usage
This course provides an overview of basic grammatical
concepts and terms that students can apply to particular
examples and difficulties of usage.
BDM 110 Basics of Digital Media
This course is an introduction to principles and practice of
design for digital media (desk-top publishing, electronic
imaging and interactive media).
BDM 111 Creative Industries & the Arts
This course is an in-depth study of the creative industries
and how this relates to the growth of cultural production,
consumption, increased significance of knowledge
and creativity in the aspects of economic production,
distribution and consumption and the importance of the
services sector. The focus is on the burgeoning creative
industries as a consequence of the digital landscape, and
catalyst for improved world economies.
ENG 113 Introduction to Literature & Prose
This course is designed to introduce first year students
to the literary aspects of the essay and (auto) biography,
and to the structure and components of the novel and
short story.
FRE 217 French Language 1
This course is designed to develop students’ competence
in spoken and written French so as they have a more
spontaneous use of the French language. Emphasis
will be laid on mastering basic language functions and

145

BMS 113 Theories of Mass Communication
This course is a brief survey of media in Botswana
including indigenous communication techniques, and
showing links to media in the region and the wider
world. A survey of current media houses, trends and
genres in Botswana is included.
ENG 131 Writing in English
This course familiarises students with various rhetorical
principles and examines various features of discourse
types specific to particular genres.
ENG 123 Introduction to Literature, Drama & Poetry
This course introduces students to the literary and
theatrical aspects of drama, and the structure and
literary strategies of poetry.
FRE 227 French Language 2
This course is a follow-up to FRE217. It aims at developing
learners’ ability to use the French language efficiently
in a practical way. It incorporates more advanced
language structures and functions with emphasis on
conversational skills. There will be language activities
related to all four skills- reading, writing, listening and
speaking. – that will enable learners to understand and
communicate in the spoken and written language for
practical purposes.
CHN 106 Basic Practical Mandarin 2
The course is for students who have completed Basic
Practical Mandarin 2. The course teaches skills of
reception (reading and listening) and production
(speaking and writing) in Mandarin Chinese at basic level.
In this course, students are expected to start acquiring
basic translation skills from Mandarin into English.
ALC 141 Introduction to the Study of Language &
Linguistics
The course will generally include a description and
analysis of various genres of African oral literature
and the role of indigenous knowledge in sustainable
development. It is basically an introduction to the
multi-faceted nature of African of oral literature and
indigenous knowledge.

BDM 201 Concept Development & Design
The aim of this course is to help students generate and
formulate ideas, and consider ways through which great
ideas can be presented to communicate effectively to
the audience in order to inform, engage and entertain.
BDM 203 Screen Writing
Students explore the key concepts and principles involved
in screen writing. Students will also learn to develop a
basic storyline, character outlines, and construction of
scenes, screen formatting and writing.
BMS 224 Introduction to Film & Video
A survey of the history of world film, from silent
movies through to the digital age, including the major
production methods.
BDM 204 Cinematography
Students are introduced to cinematography, with a focus
on videography practices involving planning a scene,
videography, framing, lighting, the long take and live
video production. Advanced theories of photography are
also discussed in the course.
BDM 205 2D Animation
Students learn the basics of animation, including history
and theory of computer animation. Learning focuses
on 2D design techniques, storyboarding, and the use of
basic animation software.
BDM 206 Desk Top Publishing
This course is designed to introduce students to a range
of layout and publishing techniques used in digital
environments. Learning involves the use of basic desktop
publishing computer applications to produce basic
designs for print, and online environments.
BDM 210 Digital Photography
Students are introduced to cinematography, with a focus
on videography practices involving planning a scene,
videography, framing, lighting, the long take and live
video production. Advanced theories of photography are
also discussed in the course.
BMS 226 Ethics for Media Professionals
The course focuses in the analysis of theoretical issues
concerning media ethics and their practical application
in various case studies of media within Botswana and
beyond.
BMS 229 Basics of Video Production
A mainly practical course on the basic requirements of
pre-production, production and post-production in the
making of video films.
BDM 214 Video & Film Documentary
In this course, students develop skills for producing a
documentary. The phases through which these skills
are learnt include preproduction, production and postproduction. Students learn to develop their project
ideas, write script, draft storyboards, plan production,
shoot videos, edit and produce a good narrative through
documentary
BDM 215 Visual Effects
Students in this course explore intriguing techniques
used by camera technicians and pyrotechnic experts.
Further, students develop skills such as puppetry, digitalanimation, model-making and action photography,
which are needed to make films, and animated videos
that fascinates the audiences.
BDM 216 Graphics Design
In this course, students learn advanced concepts to

create visual designs such as typography, photo editing,
logo creation and layout and design for print and online
publications using Adobe Photoshop, Illustrator and
InDesign.

for mobile devices, including smartphones and tablets.
Students will also design and build a variety of Apps
throughout the course to reinforce learning and to
develop real competency.

BMS 320 Media & Society
A theoretical course analysing the way media represents
various groups and the way media impact upon society.

IKM 400 Entrepreneurship & Innovation
The course covers the following topics: Introduction to
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Planning, Development
of Entrepreneurial and Innovative Ventures, Foundations
of Entrepreneurship, Techniques for Creative Thinking,
and Processes for Developing, Planning and Launching a
New Venture including Protecting Intellectual Property,
Evaluating Markets, Developing Innovative Business
Models, Budgeting, and Raising Finance, Communication,
Public Speaking, Writing, Interpersonal/Group Skills, Time
Management, Business Analysis, Market Research, User
Orientation, Service Orientation, Customer Management,
Customer Service, Negotiation, Public Relations.

BMS 321 Media Law
The course is a survey of regulations and laws relevant
to journalism, broadcasting and telecommunications,
and new media, with case studies to illustrate their
application.
BMS 340 Sound Design
This is a practical course aimed at training students on an
array of audio editing techniques for film, music and new
media. Students also explore techniques of recording,
mixing, processing, sampling analysis and editing of
digital audio using computer software.
BDM 304 Music Video Production
In this course, students develop professional skills and
knowledge in the production of music videos. The focus
is on the role of music video directors and producers, for
students to further develop a creative direction, technical
skills and digital film production processes and practices.
BDM 305 3D Computer Animation 1
This course trains students to be specialists in the latest
technologies within 3D animation, Students taking this
course also train in story telling, lighting, 3D modeling,
and compositing as well as producing animated
sequences.
BDM 306 Design for Interactive Media 1
This course introduces students to the HTML language
used in website environments and other interactive
media. Students will learn how to use the Adobe
Dreamweaver and Flash to design and develop an
interactive media (website, interactive CD-Rom and
DVDRom).
BMS 328 Communication Research Methods
An intensive course explaining the principles of research
and useful quantitative and qualitative media research
methodologies. This course prepares students for project/
dissertation courses (BMS 441 and BMS 451).
BMS 341 Media Practice 1
In this course, students are exposed studio work where
they develop skills and demonstrate competencies
working towards producing and publishing media
content. Course and assessment linked to Media studies
projects (radio, TV and newspaper).
BMS 337 Cinema Language in World Film
A survey of important cinematography and editing styles
such as montage, neo-realism, cinema noire and magic
realism, along with production of mini video projects to
apply the theories in practice.
BMS 335 Motion Graphics
This is a mainly practical course in special effects and
animation for film, television and video. Students are
trained to produce graphics, create motion sequences
and synchronize visuals with audio.
BDM 316 Mobile Application Design
A study of emerging techniques and technologies
used in interface for mobile communication, gaming
and simulation projects in online convergence media
platforms. Students learn how to develop applications

146

BMS 441 Media Project / Dissertation 1
This course is linked to BMS 328. It is the start of a media
project that may be theoretical research or a practical
media artifact that shows the student has acquired the
skills of using media techniques for communication.
Assessment includes the production of a proposal for
project/dossier.
BMS 442 Media Practice 2
This course is the second internal internship practice
through which students are exposed to studio work
where they develop further skills and competences
working towards producing and publishing media
content. Student enrolled in this course are placed for a
minimum of two months for media roles in government
and private organizations where they experience the
work environment.
BDM 404 Film Directing & Producing
This is an in-depth class that focuses on the theory and
practice in directing films. The course looks into the roles
and responsibilities of the film director, film directing,
script breakdown, scene blocking, working with cast and
crew, conducting rehearsals and overseeing elements of
a production.
BDM 405 3D Computer Animation 2
This is an advanced course in which students are trained
to be specialists in the latest technologies within 3D
animation, Students will learn story telling, develop
advanced skills to do lighting, 3D modeling, and digital
compositing as well as producing full length animated
videos.
BDM 406 Design for Interactive Media 2
This course introduces students to advanced wed design
and development using language UI/UX design, HTML/
CSS coding, content management system design, and
interactive media programming. Students will develop
advanced skills using Adobe Dreamweaver and Flash to
design and develop a dynamic websites and interactive
interfaces for DVD Rom.
IKM 411 Managing Audio Visual Archives
This course equips students with knowledge and skills
necessary for the management of audiovisual records.
Due to their dependence on playback equipment, such
records are often underutilized or become unusable due
to lack of playback equipment. This course therefore
aims at inculcating skills necessary for the effective
management of audiovisual records and in providing
measures that ensure the long-term preservation and
accessibility of non-print collections
BMS 451 Media Project Dissertation 2
The course is linked to BMS 328 and BMS 441. Students

enrolled in the course are expected to independently
produce a practical media artifact /or dissertation
(minimum 40 000 words) to demonstrate they have
acquired skills, knowledge and competences to plan,
produce and read media. Assessment also includes the
production/execution of a media project/dossier.
BMS 429 Media Management & Entrepreneurship
A practical and theoretical course on how management
/ organizational issues in the media relate to the wider
economic landscape. Students enrolled in this course
also explore media ownership, leadership practices in the
media, and project management for media projects.
BACHELOR OF PUBLIC RELATIONS AND INTEGRATED
COMMUNICATION (BPC)
The Bachelor of Public Relations and Integrated
Communication (BPC) program has been designed to
equip learners with a mixture of theory and practice
necessary for a successful professional career in the
PR, advertising and integrated communication. BPC
qualification meets the needs of society by providing
learners who are competent in the tasks required
of them in public relations and communication
offices, units or departments thus contributing to the
overall improvement of the public perception of any
organization that has the potential to employ them.
4.0 Career Opportunities
Graduates of this programme can expect to fill skills
gaps in the government, private sector and nongovernmental organisations where they can assume
or serve in roles such as public affairs, public relations,
advertising and public campaigns, marketing, writing,
PR research, executive officers, communication strategy
design, applied communication, and branding.
4.1 Programe Structure
The Bachelor of PR and Integrated
Communication is a full-time programme extending
over eight semesters. The total minimum credits required
to complete the programme is 124 and all students are
expected to complete all the required GEC (10 credits),
Language (6 credits), Cores (78 credits), other optional
courses (15 credits) and electives courses (9 credits).
Students will be expected to take between one and four
BMS courses per semester to reach the minimum and
maximum number of credits required to graduate. Parttime study for the Degree is also possible. It is expected
that part-time students would finish the course work in
not more than ten semesters.
4.1.1
GEC and Electives
In accordance with General Regulations 00.619 and
00.620, a student must during the first two semesters at
the University register for at least 10 general educations
courses and in addition must register a minimum of an
additional nine credits of elective or general education
courses.
4.1.2 In Levels 2 (2nd semester), 3 and 4 of the
programme, two specialized streams will be offered:
a) Public Relations and Advertising
b) Communication Design
Level 1 Semester 1
BDM110 Basics of Digital Media (3) CORE
BPC101
Introduction to PR & Integrated 		
Communication (3) CORE
COM111 Communication & Academic Literacy Skills 1
(3) CORE
ICT111
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (3) CORE
ENG121 Introduction to English Language, 		
Description & Usage (3) CORE
ALC121
Introduction to the Study of Language &
Linguistics (3) OPTIONAL

CHN105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1 (3) OPTIONAL
ENG113
Introduction to Literature and Prose (3)
		OPTIONAL
FRE217
French Language 1 (3) OPTIONAL
17 CREDITS
Level 1 Semester 2
BPC110
Introduction to Advertising & Marketing (3)
CORE
BMS113 Theories of Mass Communication (3) CORE
COM112 Communication & Academic Literacy Skills 1
1 (3) CORE
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (3) CORE
ENG131 Writing in English (3) CORE
ALC141
Introduction to Oral Literature & Indigenous
Knowledge (3) OPTIONAL
CHN106 Basic Practical Mandarin 11 (3) OPTIONAL
ENG123 Introduction to Literature, Drama & Poetry
(3) OPTIONAL
FRE227
French Language 11 (3) OPTIONAL
17 CREDITS
Level 2 Semester 3
BPC202
PR & Advertising in Botswana (3) CORE
BPC203
Understanding Behaviours of Media
Consumers (3) CORE
BPC204
Issues in Crisis Management (3) CORE
BPC205
Social Media Management for PR (3)
OPTIONAL
BPC206
Interpersonal Communication (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Level 2 Semester 4
BMS226 Ethics for Media Professionals (3) CORE
BPC210
Advocacy and Speech Writing (3) CORE
BPC211
Corporate Social Responsibility (3) CORE
BMS230 Writing for PR and Copy Writing (3)
OPTIONAL
BPC216
Public Sector Communication (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Level 3 Semester 5
BMS320 Media & Society (3) CORE
BMS321 Media Law (3) CORE
BPC302
Event Planning & Management (3) CORE
BMS326 Research for PR & Advertising (3) OPTIONAL
BPC315
Strategic communication (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Level 3 Semester 6
BMS328 Communication Research Methods (3) CORE
BMS341 Media Practice 1 (6) CORE
BPC316
Product Marketing (3) OPTIONAL
BMS329 Development Communication (3) OPTIONAL
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Level 4 Semester 7
BPC401
Corporate Communication (3) CORE
BMS441 Media Project / Dissertation 1 (3) CORE
BMS442 Media Practice 2 (6) CORE
BMS426 Economic & Social Issues in PR & 		
Advertising (3) OPTIONAL
BPC406
Political Communication (3) OPTIONAL
15 CREDITS
Level 4 Semester 8
BMS434 Public Communication Campaigns (3) CORE
BMS451 Media Project / Dissertation 2 (6) CORE
BMS429 Media Management & Entrepreneurship (3)

CORE
1 Elective Course (3)
15 CREDITS
Course Listings
SEMESTER 1
ENG 121 Introduction
to
English
Language,
Description & Usage
This course provides an overview of basic grammatical
concepts and terms that students can apply to particular
examples and difficulties of usage.
BDM 110 Basics of Digital Media
This course is an introduction to principles and practice of
design for digital media (desk-top publishing, electronic
imaging and interactive media).
BPC 101 Introduction to PR and Integrated
Communication
This course survey public relations industries, including
a description of the whole production process and the
main requirements of a worker in the public relations
industries. Moreover, the course also explores various
forms contexts in society, those impacted by applied
communication.
ENG 113 Introduction to Literature & Prose
This course is designed to introduce first year students
to the literary aspects of the essay and (auto) biography,
and to the structure and components of the novel and
short story.
FRE 217 French Language 1
This course is designed to develop students’ competence
in spoken and written French so as they have a more
spontaneous use of the French language. Emphasis
will be laid on mastering basic language functions and
linguistic structures for effective expression in both
written and verbal French. The content of this course
will cover practical exercises both oral and written in the
classroom and in the language laboratory.
CHN 105 Basic Practical Mandarin 1
This is a beginners’ course for learners with no prior
knowledge of Mandarin Chinese language. It introduces
students to basic features of Mandarin including
the phonetic system and grammatical system. The
course helps students acquire a basic vocabulary of
around 400 Chinese words and master expressions of
everyday language use. The emphasis is on listening
comprehension and oral skills.
ALC 121 Introduction to Oral Literature & Indigenous
Knowledge
The course includes the study of human language and its
significance in human life. It also deals with linguistics
as a linguistic approach to the study of language,
the branches of linguistics, how it is related to other
disciplines and can be applied to some professions.
SEMESTER 2
BPC 110 Introduction to Advertising & Marketing
This course is a survey of advertising and marketing
industries including a description of the whole
production process and the main requirements of a
worker in the advertising and marketing fields.
BMS 113 Theories of Mass Communication
This course is a brief survey of media in Botswana
including indigenous communication techniques, and
showing links to media in the region and the wider
world. A survey of current media houses, trends and
genres in Botswana is included.
ENG 131 Writing in English
This course familiarises students with various rhetorical

147

principles and examines various features of discourse
types specific to particular genres.
ENG 123 Introduction to Literature, Drama & Poetry
This course introduces students to the literary and
theatrical aspects of drama, and the structure and
literary strategies of poetry.
FRE 227 French Language 2
This course is a follow-up to FRE217. It aims at developing
learners’ ability to use the French language efficiently
in a practical way. It incorporates more advanced
language structures and functions with emphasis on
conversational skills. There will be language activities
related to all four skills- reading, writing, listening and
speaking. – that will enable learners to understand and
communicate in the spoken and written language for
practical purposes.
CHN 106 Basic Practical Mandarin 2
The course is for students who have completed Basic
Practical Mandarin 2. The course teaches skills of
reception (reading and listening) and production
(speaking and writing) in Mandarin Chinese at basic level.
In this course, students are expected to start acquiring
basic translation skills from Mandarin into English.
ALC 141 Introduction to the Study of Language &
Linguistics
The course will generally include a description and
analysis of various genres of African oral literature
and the role of indigenous knowledge in sustainable
development. It is basically an introduction to the
multi-faceted nature of African of oral literature and
indigenous knowledge.
SEMESTER 3
BPC 202 PR & Advertising in Botswana
This is a survey of the public relations and advertising
industry in Botswana. The focus is on the development
of public relations as a field, and how the advertising
industry continues to evolve locally in response to
technology, socio-economic development and culture.
BPC 203 Understanding Behaviours of Media
Consumers
This course introduces the theory of consumer behaviour
and relates it to the practice of marketing. Students
study how emotions and behavioural responses precede
purchasing, use and impact of goods and services. It will
identify the key psychological reasons for why particular
consumers in particular situations behave the way they
do and then translate this understanding into effective
marketing mix decisions.
BPC 204 Issues and Crisis Management
The structure of the course will reflect the crisis
management process: prevention, preparation, response
and long-term. The course examines the interdisciplinary
relational nature of issues and crisis communication from
conceptual and practical perspectives. Emphasis will be
placed on practical application of crisis communications
theory, with numerous uses of real-life case studies and
guest lectures by top crisis expert practitioners.
BPC 205 Social Media Management for PR
Social media is saturating the Internet and it is vital
for brands to understand how to effectively use it. PR
practitioners of the 21st century must understand the
new media culture and learn how to apply social media
in Public Relations to adapt to this new environment.
BPC 206 Interpersonal Communication
In this course, students study the concepts and

theories of interpersonal communication. Topics
include interpersonal language skills and relationship
communication, communication strategies, the process
and functions of communication, and listening and
response skills and managing conflict.
SEMESTER 4
BMS 226 Ethics for Media Professionals
The course focuses in the analysis of theoretical issues
concerning media ethics and their practical application
in various case studies of media within Botswana and
beyond.
BPC 210 Advocacy & Speech Writing
In this course, students develop public speaking and
speech writing for policy advocacy in organization.
The focus will be on theory and practice of good public
speaking for public relations officers as well as an
understanding of principles and techniques of rhetoric
speaking and communication in public settings.
BPC 211 Corporate Social Responsibility
This course introduces students to the concept of
corporate social responsibility. Students will reflect on
contemporary trends in corporate citizenship, social
environmental responsibility and accountability.
BMS 230 Writing for PR & Copy Writing
A mainly practical course on the basic requirements of
copy-writing for both print and broadcast media in the
field of PR and Advertising.
BPC 216 Public Sector Communication
This course provides an overview of managing in the
public and not-for-profit sectors. The current practices,
challenges and contexts. Students will explore the
differences between communicating in the public
sector and in the private sector and also look at the
interplay between critical organisational processes and
communication functions.
SEMESTER 5
BMS 320 Media & Society
A theoretical course analysing the way media represents
various groups and the way media impact upon society.
BMS 321 Media Law
The course is a survey of regulations and laws relevant
to journalism, broadcasting and telecommunications,
and new media, with case studies to illustrate their
application.
BPC 302 Events Planning and Management
Students learn the basics of planning and coordinating
small, medium and large-scale events such as workshops,
festivals and product launches. Learning combines
management skills such as budgeting and scheduling
and creative skills including promotion and brand
management.
BMS 326 Research for PR & Advertising
Market and product research in order to motivate
campaigns in PR and advertising fields.
BMS 329 Development Communication
This is a survey of major development communication
theories and their application in different media projects
as part of total communication strategies.
SEMESTER 6
BMS 328 Communication Research Methods
An intensive course explaining the principles of research
and useful quantitative and qualitative media research
methodologies. This course prepares students for project/

148

dissertation courses (BMS 441 and BMS 451).
BMS 341 Media Practice 1
In this course, students are exposed studio work where
they develop skills and demonstrate competencies
working towards producing and publishing media
content. Course and assessment linked to Media studies
projects (radio, TV and newspaper).
BPC 315 Product Positioning
This course is a blend of theory and practice to provide
students with perspectives for corporate marketing
and functions of brand management. Students
develop insights into how profitable brand strategies
can be created as well as the implications for product
positioning.
BPC 316 Strategic Communication
The course combines both the theoretical knowledge
of fundamental theories concepts and applications
of strategic communication and an overview of
practices in communication management. The term
strategic communication covers a lot of territory
such as advocacy/ activism, health communication,
investor relations, content marketing and at the core
of these there is a planned effort to influence others by
providing information and developing and developing
relationships.
SEMESTER 7
BPC 401 Corporate communication
This is a survey of major development communication
theories and their application in different media projects
as part of total communication strategies.
BMS 441 Media Project / Dissertation 1
This course is linked to BMS 328. It is the start of a media
project that may be theoretical research or a practical
media artifact that shows the student has acquired the
skills of using media techniques for communication.
Assessment includes the production of a proposal for
project/dossier.
BMS 442 Media Practice 2
This course is the second internal internship practice
through which students are exposed to studio work
where they develop further skills and competences
working towards producing and publishing media
content. Student enrolled in this course are placed for a
minimum of two months for media roles in government
and private organisations where they experience the
work environment.
BMS 426 Economic & Social Issues in PR & Advertising
This course aims to refresh your memory of the basic
knowledge of advertising and public relations. Precisely,
this course aims to: refresh your memory of the
concepts, structures and operations of both advertising
and public relations as institutions. To acquaint you
with all the laws and ethics or codes of conducts and
the wide spectrum of the regulatory rules and principles
that guide advertising and public relations in Botswana
as compared to the developed countries of the United
States and Britain respectively.
BPC 406 Political Communication
This course will study the relationship between media
and politics in Botswana as well as the global sphere.
However, the concentration of this course is on political
communication in the Botswana context. It will
consider the changing models of information access
and their influence on political authority figures such
as information as power and the conflict between
media and government. The lectures will explore how

broadcast, networked, and social media affect political
processes, social movements, domination and resistance.
It will equip the students with the ability to develop
and communicate critical insight into the new world of
mediated political communication and action.
SEMESTER 8
BMS 434 Public Communication Campaigns
This course, introduces students to the process of
campaign development, management, and evaluation
using the principles and strategies of public relations and
agency management. Students will master the elements
of a strategic communications campaign through
direct experience. Recreating real-world professional
settings, this course marks the transition from student
to professional.
BMS 451 Media Project Dissertation 2
The course is linked to BMS 328 and BMS 441. Students
enrolled in the course are expected to independently
produce a practical media artifact /or dissertation
(minimum 40 000 words) to demonstrate they have
acquired skills, knowledge and competences to plan,
produce and read media. Assessment also includes the
production/execution of a media project/dossier.
BMS 429 Media Management & Entrepreneurship
A practical and theoretical course on how management
issues in the media relate to the wider economic
landscape. Students enrolled in this course also explore
media ownership, leadership practices in the media, and
project management for media projects.

PORTUGUESE STUDIES
PROGRAMME

PROGRAMME REGULATIONS FOR THE BA IN
PORTUGUESE LANGUAGE AND LUSOPHONE STUDIES
Except as provided here, General Regulations for
the Faculty of Humanities shall apply. Eligibility for
admission to the programme shall be according to the
General Regulations of the Faculty of Humanities.
DEGREE PROGRAMME OPTIONS
The proposed programme in Portuguese Language and
Lusophone Studies comprises the following options:
1. A direct admission specialist single major programme
in Portuguese and Lusophone Studies to be known as
the BPLLS= 126 credits of which Portuguese will consist
of 78 credits.
2. A BAH major/minor combination in which Portuguese
is a major: 54 credits.
3. A minor/major combination in which Portuguese is a
minor: 24 credits.
4. A double major: 45 credits.
Degree Programme
A direct entry single subject Major: available to BPLLS
students only
126 credits (78 credits of Portuguese)
2 core language and culture courses
11 optional social/historical courses
8 Electives (including
4 GEC)
Major Minor
(Portuguese as a Major, available to BDPLS students only)
54 credits of Portuguese
2 core language and literature courses
8 Optional social/historical courses
4 electives courses
4 GEC
Major/Major in which Portuguese is taken as a Major in

combination with any other major programme
45 credits of Portuguese
1 Core language and culture courses
8 Optional social/historical courses
4 Elective courses
4 GEC
Major Minor
(Portuguese as a Minor, not available to BPLLS students
but can be taken in combination with any major
programme in the university)
63 credits
7 core language and culture courses
There is a compulsory semester in Portugal, Mozambique
or any other suitable Lusophone country during which
students shall be required to obtain a minimum of 30
credits in Portuguese Language courses and at least 28
credits in related courses.
The Departmental Board shall determine and publish a
list of approved optional courses from other departments.
The Board may at its discretion add or remove courses
from this list.
In the first-year students of Portuguese Language and
Lusophone Studies have to take two compulsory English
courses, each semester, which carry twelve credits each.
In order to enable students who may wish to have an
optional major other than English in this programme to
do so, provision has to be made for such students to take
extra credits beyond the stipulated 60-72 per semester.
This means that the students may have to take a load of up
to sixty credits. The ad hoc management sub-committee
thus requests the relevant university authorities to grant
permission to students to take a credit load of more than
sixty credits, so as to accommodate such cases.
Programme Structure
Year 1
Semester 1
PRT 111
Basic Portuguese Language1 Core (3)
PRT 112
Portuguese Language in Practice 1 Core
(3)
COM 111 Communication and Study Skills 1 GEC
(3)
ICT 111
Computing and Information Skills 1 GEC
(3)
ENG 121 Introduction to English Language 		
Description and Usage Core (3)
ENG 113 Introduction to Literature (prose) Core (3)
Semester 2
PRT 121 Basic Portuguese Language 2 Core (3)
PRT122
Portuguese Language in Practice 2 Core (3)
COM112 Communication and Study Skills II GEC (3)
ICT 112
Computing and Information Skills GEC (3)
ENG 131 Writing in English
Core
3
ENG 123 Introduction to Literature (Drama and
		
Poetry) Core (3)
Year 2
Semester 3
PRT 211
Elementary Portuguese 1 Core (3)
PRT 212 Portuguese Language in Practice 3 Core (3)
PRT 213 Introduction to Lusophone cultures Core
(3)
One Elective Course Elective (3)
One option from the Humanities Courses: Optional (3)
TRS 203 African Traditional Religions in Botswana
Optional (3)		
LIS 223
Digital Libraries, Optional (3)
ENG 213 Prose Literature of Southern Africa Optional

149

(3)		
The Drama of Southern Africa, Optional (3
African Cultures and Civilizations c.1500
optional (3)		
BMS 222 Introduction to Broadcasting, Optional (3)
BMS 220 Introduction to Techniques of Digital Media
Optional (3)		
BMS 221 Introduction to Journalism, Optional (3)
BMS 223 Introduction to PR and Advertising Optional
(3)		
BMS 224 Introduction to Film and Video, Optional (3)
POL 101 Introduction to Political Science, Optional
(3)		
POL 310 Contemporary Africa, Optional (3)		
SOC 121 Introduction to Sociological Concepts
and Principles, Optional (3)
ENG 223
HIS 201

Semester 4
PRT 221 Elementary Portuguese 2 Core (3) (pre-req.
PRT211)
PRT 222 Portuguese Language in Practice 4 Core (3)
		
(pre-req. PRT212
PRT 224 Introduction to Lusophone Literature and
Cinema Core (3)
		
Any two options from the Humanities
Courses: Optional (9)
BIM 202 Introduction to Databases and Information
Retrieval, Optional (3)
ENG 233 The poetry of Southern Africa, Optional (3)
HIS 202
Africa in the Era of the Atlantic Slave
		
Trade c. 1500 - 1800, Optional (3)
BMS 227 Print Journalism, Reporting and Writing
Optional (3)
BMS 228 Broadcast Interview and Presentation
Techniques Optional (3)
BMS 229 Basics of Video Production, Optional (3)
BMS 230 Writing for PR and Copy-writing, Optional
(3)
BMS 231 Major Film and Video Genres, Optional (3)
POL 305 Politics of Southern Africa, Optional (3)
POL 309 Politics of Poverty in Southern Africa,
Optional (3)
SOC 122 The Social Structure of Society, Optional (3)
Year 3
Semester 5, Or equivalent immersion programme in a
Lusophone university.
PRT 311
		
PRT 312

Intermediate Portuguese 1 Core (3)
(pre-req. PRT211)
Portuguese Language in Practice 5 Core (3)
(pre-req. PRT222)
PRT 313 Contemporary Cultures of Lusophone Africa
Core (3) (pre-req. PRT213)
1 elective , Elective (3)		
Any one option from the two Portuguese Courses:
Optional (3)		
PRT 315 Portuguese Translation and Interpretation
1, Optional (3) (pre-req. PRT311 & PRT
312)
PRT 316 Contemporary Lusophone Arts, Optional (3)
Any one option from the Humanities Courses: Optional
(3		
ALL 351
Po)litics of Southern African Poetry,
Optional (3)		
TRS 304 African Philosophy and Culture, Optional (3)
ENG 333 Critical Issues in Modern African Literature:
Phases of Modern African Literature
		
Optional (3)		
ENG 363 Oral Literature, Optional(3)
ENG 317 African Drama, Optional (3)
HIS 333
Introduction to Foreign Policy, Diplomacy

HIS 335
		
BMS 320
BMS 323
BMS 324
BMS 325
BMS 326
BMS 327
SOC 123
SOC 324

and International Relations 1800 to 1945
Optional (3)		
Colonial Latin America to 1830, Optional
(3)
Media and Society, Optional (3)
Photo Journalism, Optional (3)
Broadcast News and Production, Optional
(3)		
Basics of TV Production, Optional (3)
Research for PR and Advertising, Optional
(3)		
History of Film and Video Documentary,
Optional (3)		
Social Inequality, Optional (3)
S o c i o l o g y o f G e n d e r, O p t i o n a l ( 3 )

Year 3
Semester 6
PRT 321 Intermediate Portuguese 2 Core (3)
PRT 322 Portuguese Language in Practice 6 Core (3)
PRT 324 Contemporary Literature of Lusophone
Africa Core (3)
Any one option from the two 			
Portuguese Courses: Optional (3)
PRT 325 Portuguese Translation and Interpretation 2
Optional (3)
PRT 323 Brazilian Culture and Literature, Optional (3)
		
Any one option from the Humanities
Courses: Optional (3)
ALL 353 African Oral Literature and the Media
Optional (3)
ENG 383 Critical Issues in Modern African Literature:
Critical Debates in African Literature ptional
(3)
ENG 343 Modern African Poetry, Optional (3)
HIS 342
Modern Anglophone, Francophone and
Lusophone West Africa, Optional (3)
HIS 344
The Roots of Crisis in Modern Central Africa
Optional (3)
BMS 329 Developmental Communication Optional (3)
BMS 331 Print Journalism Editing, Optional (3)
BMS 333 Radio Documentary Writing and Production
Optional (3)
BMS 334 TV and Video Documentary Writing and
Production, Optional (3)
BMS 336 PR and Advertising Campaigns, Optional
(3)
BMS 337 Cinema Language in World Film, Optional (3)
SOC 326 Race and Ethnicity, Optional (3)
Year 4
Semester 7
PRT 411
Text analysis and directed writing 		
in Portuguese Core (3)		
PRT 412 Advanced oral communication 		
in Portuguese Core (3)		
PRT 417 Portuguese for Specific Purposes Core
(3)		
		
Any one option from the two 		
Portuguese Courses: Optional (3)
PRT 415 Portuguese Translation and Interpretation 3
Optional (3)		
PRT414
Literature and Culture of Portugal Optional
(3)		
		
Any one option from the Humanities
Courses: Optional 3		
ALL 422 A Sociolinguistic Study of Southern Africa
Optional (3)		
ALL 451
Studies in African Aesthetics, Optional
(3)
ENG 414 The African Novel I, Optional (3)
HIS 401
Mfecane and the Settler Scramble for

BMS 421
BMS 422
BMS 423
BMS 424
BMS 425
BMS 427
SOC 424

Southern Africa, Optional (3)		
Current Issues in African Media, Optional (3)
Broadcasting Programming, Optional (3)
Investigative Journalism, Optional (3)
Radio Drama, Script-writing and Production
Optional (30)
TV and Video Drama, Optional (3)
African Cinemas, Optional (3)
African Social Thought Optional (3)

Year 4
Semester 8
PRT 421 Research essay in Portuguese Core (6)
		
(pre-req. PRT321 & PRT 322)
Any one option from the two 			
Portuguese Courses: Optional (3)
PRT 422 Portuguese Linguistics Optional 3
		
(pre-req. PRT321 & PRT 322)
PRT 414 Specific Topics in Lusophone Literature,
Optional (3)
Any one option from the Humanities 		
Courses: Optional (3)
ALL 442 Creative Writing, Theory and Practice,
Optional (3)
ALL 455 Postcolonial Theory and African Literature
Optional (3)
TRS 418 Contemporary African Philosophy, Optional
(3)
ENG 463 Gender Issues in African Literature Optional
(3)
HIS 416
Land, Labour and Liberation in Mozambique,
Namibia and Zimbabwe, Optional (3)
BMS 429 Media Management and Entrepreneurship
Optional (3)
BMS 430 On-line Media Production, Optional (3)
BMS 432 Live Radio Broadcasting , Optional (3)
BMS 433 TV Entertainment Shows, Optional (3)
BMS 434 Public Communication Campaign, Optional
(3)
BMS 435 Current cinema , Optional (3)

DEPARTMENT OF THEOLOGY
AND RELIGIOUS STUDIES
Degree Programmes

Bachelor of Arts in Humanities and Degree Programme
Bachelor of Arts in Pastoral Studies
Special Regulations for the BA Programme
1. Theology and Religious Studies is offered as a Single
Major Subject, a Major Subject in a Combined Major
programme, a Major and Minor Subject and as a
multidisciplinary degree as stipulated in General.
Regulations 22.37 and 00.2114 and departmental
regulations.
2. A multidisciplinary degree including Theology and
Religious Studies may, in accordance with General
Regulation 00.2114 be approved in special cases, but
only at the discretion of the TRS Department.
3. All courses offered in the TRS Department will be
semester long. However, students taking TRS 420
Directed Research II will also be required to have taken
TRS 326 Directed Research I.
4. Unless indicated otherwise all courses will carry 3
credits.
5. Not all courses listed may be offered in any one
semester.
6. Students pursuing a Single Major in TRS are required
to take a total of 96 credits in TRS consisting of 48

150

credits from the core courses and additional credits
from optional and other courses.
7. Students pursuing a Major in TRS as part of a
combined Major/Minor are required to take a total
of 84 credits in TRS consisting of 48 credits from the
core courses and additional credits from optional and
other courses.
8. Students pursuing a Major in TRS as part of a
combined Major/Major are required to take a total
of 60 credits in TRS consisting of 24 credits from the
core courses and additional credits from optional and
other courses.
9. Students pursuing a Minor in TRS as part of a
combined Minor/Major are required to take a total
of 36 credits in TRS consisting of 24 credits from the
core courses and additional credits from optional and
other courses.
10. Unless otherwise specified in the published course
description or in a written syllabus distributed by
the instructor to the students during the first week
of class lectures, course assessment will be by a
standard (750-1,000 word) written assignment, a
mid-term test, and a final examination, weighted 1:
1: 2 respectively.
11. Students from other departments and other faculties,
who wish to take TRS courses as electives, may take
any course for which they have the pre-requisites.
12. Students pursuing a Single Major with concentration
in Biblical studies are recommended to include Biblical
languages either Hebrew (for Old Testament) or Greek
(for New Testament).
Programme Structure
SINGLE MAJOR PROGRAMME
In a Single Major Degree, a student shall take the
following:
Level: 100
Semester 1:1 core course, any one optional course.
Semester 2:1 core course, any one optional course.
Level: 200
Semester 3
1 core course, any one optional course.
Semester 4
1 core course, any one optional course.
Level: 300
Semester 5
Three core courses and any three optional courses.
Semester 6: Three core courses and any three optional
courses.
Level: 400
Semester 7
Three core courses and any three optional courses.
Semester 8:Three core courses and any three optional
courses.
MAJOR (TRS)/ MINOR
In a Major/Minor Degree a student shall take the
following courses:
Level: 100
Semester 1
1 core course, any one optional course.
Semester 2
1 core course, any one optional course.
Level: 200
Semester 3
1 core course, any one optional course.
Semester 4: 1 core course, any one optional course.

Level: 300
Semester 5
2 core courses in the area of specialisation (TRS 301
for Theology, TRS 304 for Biblical Studies, TRS 302 for
Religious Studies and TRS 305 for Philosophy), other area
and two optional courses.
Semester 6
2 core courses in the area of specialisation (TRS 315 for
Theology, TRS 316 for Religious Studies, TRS 317 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 318 for Philosophy), any two
optional courses.
Level: 400
Semester 7
2 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 401 for
Theology, TRS 402 for Religious Studies, TRS 403 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 404 for Philosophy), and two
optional courses.
Semester 8
2 core course from the area of specialisation (TRS 415
for Theology, TRS 416 for Religious Studies, TRS 417 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 418 for Philosophy), and any two
optional courses.
MAJOR (TRS)/ MAJOR
In a Major/Major Degree a student shall take the
following courses:
Level: 100
Semester 1
1 core course and any one optional course.
Semester 2
1 core course and any one optional course.
Level: 200
Semester 3
1 core course and any one optional course.
Semester 4
1 core course and any one optional course.
Level: 300
Semester 5
1 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 301 for
Theology, TRS 302 for Religious Studies, TRS 303 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 304 for Philosophy), and any
two optional courses.
Semester 6
1 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 314 for
theology, TRS 315 for Religious Studies, TRS 316 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 317 for Philosophy) and any two
optional courses.
Level: 400
Semester 7
1 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 401 for
Theology, TRS 402 for Religious Studies, TRS 403 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 404 for Philosophy) and any two
optional courses.
Semester 8
1 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 415 for
Theology, TRS 416 for Religious Studies, TRS 417 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 418 for Philosophy) any two
optional courses.
MINOR (TRS) /MAJOR
In a Minor/ Major Degree the student shall take the
following courses:

Optional Courses
TRS202
Hebrew Bible Narratives (3)
TRS203
African Traditional Religions in Botswana (3)
TRS204
Theologies of Gender (3)
TRS205
History of Philosophy II: Post-Aristotle to
Medieval (3)
TRS206
Beginning Biblical Greek I: New 		
Testament Greek (3)
TRS207
Introduction to Christian Theology (3)
TRS208
The Hebrew Bible as History & Story (3)

Level: 100
Semester 1
1 core course.
Semester 2
1 core course.
Level: 200
Semester 3
1 core course.

Semester 4
Core Courses
TRS209
History of Christian Thought (3)

Semester 4
1 core course.
Level: 300
Semester 5:1 core course in the area of specialisation
(TRS 301 for Theology, TRS 302 for Religious Studies, TRS
303 for Biblical Studies and TRS 304 for Philosophy) and
any one optional course.
Semester 6
1 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 314 for
Theology, TRS 315 for Religious Studies, TRS 316 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 317 for Philosophy) and any one
optional course.
Level: 400
Semester 7
1 core course in the area of specialisation (TRS 401 for
Theology, TRS 402 for Religious Studies, TRS 403 for
Biblical Studies and TRS 404 for Philosophy) and any one
optional course.
Semester 8:1 core course in the area of specialisation
(TRS 415 for Theology, TRS 416 for Religious Studies, TRS
417 for Biblical Studies and TRS 418 for Philosophy) and
any one optional course.
Entry Requirements
The normal entry requirements shall be as stipulated in
General 20.2 and Departmental Regulations.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core courses
TRS101
Introduction to Biblical Studies (3)
Optional Courses
TRS102
Religion and Science (3)
TRS103
Religions of Botswana (3)
TRS104
Christianity and the rise of New 		
Religious Movements in Botswana (3)
TRS105
Asian Religions: A Survey (3)
TRS106
Ethics: Classical Theories (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
TRS107
African Traditional Religions (3)
Optional Courses
TRS108
History of Philosophy I: Classical Greek
Philosophy (3)
TRS109
Biblical Interpretation (3)
TRS110
God in the Hebrew Bible (3)
TRS111
Epistemology I: Theory of Knowledge (3)
TRS112
Bible and Gender (3)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
TRS201
Logic I: Introduction to Logic (3)

151

Optional Courses
TRS210
Gospel Narratives (3)
TRS211
Ecclesiology (3)
TRS212
Beginning Biblical Greek II: New 		
Testament Greek (3)
TRS213
Johannine corpus (3)
TRS214
Beginning Arabic I: Intro. to the basic
Arabic (3)
TRS215
Metaphysics I: Appearance and Reality (3)
TRS216
History of Philosophy III: Post-Medieval
to 19th Century (3)
TRS220
Critical Thinking (3)
TRS221
Politics of Gender (3)
TRS222
Religion and Development (3)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
TRS301
Christology (3)
TRS302
Missionaries in 19th Century 		
South Africa(3)
TRS303
Creation and the Bible (3)
TRS304
African Philosophy and Culture (3)
Optional Courses
TRS305
Judaism (3)
TRS306
Intermediate Greek I: Exam. of selected
texts (3)
TRS307
Beginning Arabic II: Arabic construction (3)
TRS308
Beginning Biblical Hebrew I: 		
Introduction to Hebrew Script (3)
TRS309
Psychology of Religion (3)
TRS310
Professional Ethics (3)
TRS311
Metaphysics II: Idealism (3)
TRS312
Logic II: Logic and the Sciences (3)
TRS313
History of Christianity: Medieval to the
Reformation (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
TRS314
Christian Moral Theology (3)
TRS315
Sociology of Religion (3)
TRS316
History and Mythology of Jesus (3)
TRS317
Theodicy: The Co-existence of God and
Evil (3)
Optional Courses
TRS318
Beginning Biblical Hebrew II: Translation
of Hebrew Texts (3)
TRS319
Philosophy of Religion (3)
TRS320
Epistemology II: Theories of Truth (3)
TRS321
Metaphysics III: Body/mind Problem (3)
TRS322
History of Christianity in Southern Africa (3)
TRS323
Intermediate Greek II: Translation of
selected texts (3)
TRS324
Intermediate Arabic I: Arabic grammar (3)
TRS325
Foundational Structures of Islam (3)
TRS326
Directed Research I: Research Methods (3)

Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
TRS401
New Religious Movements (3)
TRS402
Religion and Politics (3)
TRS403
The Doctrine of Sin in the Bible (3)
TRS404
Metaphysics IV: Personal Identity (3)
Optional Courses
TRS405
Intermediate Hebrew I: Examination of
selected Hebrew texts (3)
TRS406
Intermediate Arabic II: Translation of
Arabic texts (3)
TRS407
Islam’s socio-cultural, legal and political
structures (3)
TRS409
African Christian Theologies (3)
TRS410
Theory of Government (3)
TRS411
Politics and Development of Biblical
Thought 3)
TRS412
Ecumenical Theology (3)
TRS413
Hinduism (3)
TRS414
Metaphysics V: Materialism (3 )
Semester 8
Core Courses
TRS415
Twentieth Century Theologians (3)
TRS416
Religion and Modernity (3)
TRS417
Paul’s Epistles (3)
TRS418
Contemporary African Philosophy (3)
Optional Courses
TRS419
Intermediate Hebrew II: Hebrew Texts
and Dead Sea Scrolls (3)
TRS420
Directed Research II: Research Project (3)
TRS421
History of Christianity: Modern and
contemporary (3)
TRS422
Epistemology III: Rationalism & 		
Empiricism (3)
TRS423
History of Philosophy IV: Contemporary (3)
TRS424
Buddhism (3)
TRS425
The theology of the Reformation (3)
TRS426
Religious Rituals and Sacred Places (3)
TRS427
Applied Ethics (3)
TRS428
Religious Pluralism (3)
THEOLOGY AND RELIGIOUS STUDIES COURSE
DESCRIPTIONS
TRS 101 Introduction to Biblical Studies (3)
This course will present a general overview of the
contexts in which the Old Testament and the New
Testament came into being and a survey of the contents
of both testaments. It will consider various ways in which
the Bible is used in Judaism and Christianity.
TRS 102 Religion and Science (3)
This course will study the assumptions, practices, and
methodologies of what is commonly called “religion”
and what is commonly called “Science”. It will ascertain
the similarities and differences, continuities and
discontinuities between the two domains.
TRS 103 Religions of Botswana (3)
This course will study the different religious traditions
that exist in Botswana with the view towards a better
understanding of their beliefs, rituals and practices.
It will survey ATR, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Bahái,
Sikhism and Buddhism as they have developed and are
currently practiced in Botswana.

TRS 104 Christianity and the Rise of New Religious
Movements in Botswana (3)
This course will study changes that have taken place in
the Christian churches of Botswana since independence.
It will examine the rise of New Religious Movements
and the integration of Christian belief and practice with
cultural tradition.
TRS 105 Asian Religions A Survey (3)
This course will present a comprehensive survey of
Asian religions, namely Jainism, Sikhism, Zoroastrianism,
Confucianism, Bahái, Shinto and Taoism.
TRS 106 Ethics: Classical Theories (3)
This course will offer an introduction to moral philosophy
particularly by exploring the origins of ethical reflection
among the classical Greek philosophers, including the
Sophists, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle.
TRS 107 African Traditional Religions (3)
This course will study the beliefs and practices of African
traditional religions from a phenomenological point of
view. It will focus in particular on the traditional religions
of Southern Africa.
TRS 108 History of Philosophy I: Classical Greek
Philosophy (3)
This course will study the thought of major Greek
Philosophers of the classical period, including the preSocratics (e.g Parmenides, Heraclitus, Pythagoras and
Pratogoras), Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, and the
post- Aristotle schools of Stoicism, Epicureanism and
Skepticism.
TRS 109 Biblical Interpretation (3)
This course will study different methods, both modern
and contemporary, of reading the Bible. It will explore
modern historical critical methods like textual, form,
compositional and redactional criticisms.
TRS 110 God in the Hebrew Bible (3)
This course will study the diverse depictions of God
in the Hebrew Bible, including the identities of the
surrounding cultures. In particular, it will explore such
themes as anthropomorphism, creation, monotheism
and mythology, the justice of God, the figure of Wisdom,
female imagery and God.
TRS 111 Epistemology I: Theory of Knowledge (3)
This course will introduce students to the theory of
knowledge. Students will explore how Plato, René
Descartes, Baruch de Spinoza and Gottfried von Leibniz
approached the theory of knowledge from a rationalist
point of view.
TRS 112 Bible and Gender (3)
This course will explore the construction of gender
and identity in the Hebrew and Christian Testaments.
It will examine how different types of biblical
literature constructed gender over various times and
circumstances.
TRS 201Logic I: Introduction to Logic (3)
This course will defines “Philosophy” and Logic”, and
examine in detail informal fallacies and deductive
methods of reasoning. It will explore the nature of
definitions, decisions, and classifications.
TRS 202 Hebrew Bible Narratives (3)
This course will study several short narratives from the
Hebrew Bible selected from different books. Focus will
be on the literary dimension of the story, narrative
technique, effect on a reader, ideology and social
location implied in the narrative.

152

TRS 203 African Traditional Religions in Botswana (3)
This course will study the beliefs and practices of
traditional religions in Botswana. It will survey a large
number of the ethnic groups in the country, with
emphasis on continuity and change in their mutual
relationships and in their development.
TRS 204 Theologies of Gender (3)
This course will explore theological questions
surrounding the issues of gender and gender identity. It
will examine traditional theological positions as well as
those of feminist/womanist theologians
TRS 205 History of Philosophy II: Postaristotle to
Medieval (3)
This course will study the development of philosophy
from the time following the classical Greek Philosophers
until the Middle Ages. In particular it will examine the
interaction of philosophy and religious thought, both
Christians and Islamic.
TRS 206 Beginning Greek I: New Testament Greek (3)
This course will introduce students to the basic elements
of New Testament Greek (Koine) and teach them how to
write it. It will focus on basic Koine grammar and how to
read some prescribed texts.
TRS 207 Introduction to Christian Theology (3)
This course will study the nature of theology, its different
branches and its relevance to society. It will focus on the
different methods used in doing theology, its sources, its
relationships with other sciences and its application.
TRS 208 The Hebrew Bible as History and Story (3)
This course will study both the historical texts in the
Hebrew Bible and the eternal historical factors that
have shaped the formation of the Hebrew Bible. It will
examine in detail the theological focus and agenda of
Hebrew Bible historical texts.
TRS 209 History of Christian Thought (3)
This course will study the development of Christianity
and Christian thought from the New Testament period
to its establishment as the state religion of the Roman
Empire under Constantine. It will emphasize relations
between the Church and the state and how these
affected the life of the Church and of Christian believers.
TRS 210 Gospel Narratives (3)
This course will study gospels of the New Testament,
Mark, Matthew, Luke and John. Students will study the
gospels through employing different perspectives such
as historical, literacy, sociological and liberation methods.
TRS211 Ecclesiology (3)
This course will study the doctrine of the Christian Church,
its nature and functions in relation to other doctrines,
such as the doctrine of God, Christology, and sacraments.
It will examine the scriptural, historical and systematic
dimensions of the doctrine of the Church from its origin
in New Testament times through the patristic period, the
Reformation, and the post-Reformation period.
TRS 212 Beginning Greek II: New Testament (3)
This course is a continuation of Beginning Koine Greek I.
TRS 213 Johannine Corpus (3)
This course will study the Johannine Corpus both the
Gospel of John and the Epistles of John. It will examine
the historical, philosophical and political factors that
shaped its theology in the apostolic period.

TRS214 Beginning Arabic I: Introduction to Basic Arabic
(3)
This course will introduce students to the Arabic script
and teach them how to write it. It will study basic Arabic
grammar and how to read basic prescribed texts.

TRS 306 Intermediate Greek I: Examination of Selected
Texts (3)
This course will build on the knowledge of New
Testament vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired in
Beginning Koine Greek I and II.

TRS 215 Metaphysics I: Appearance and Reality (3)
This course will introduce student to basic and
fundamental concepts of metaphysics. Students will
examine why the Platonic theory assigns reality to the
“forms” and appearance to the sensible objects.

TRS 307 Beginning Arabic II: Arabic Construction(3)
This course is a continuation of Beginning Arabic I.

TRS 216 History of Philosophy III: Post-Medieval of 19th
Century (3)
This course will survey the main strands of philosophy
from the Renaissance to modern times. It will consider
Renaissance philosophy, the critical examination of
reason and pragmatism.
TRS 220 Critical Thinking (3)
This course will train students not to take anything
they hear, read, write and do for granted without first
critically assessing and analyzing them. In order to do
these students will examine key logical concepts and
principles such as laws of identity, non contradiction and
exclude middle. Some logical formal and informal will
also be dealt with.

TRS 308 Beginning Biblical Hebrew I: Introduction to
Hebrew Script (3)
This course will introduce the student to the Hebrew
script and teach them how to write it. It studies basic
Hebrew grammar and how to read basic prescribed texts.
TRS 309 Psychology of Religion (3)
This course will critically discuss the relationship between
religion and psychology. It will study and examine the
various theories, principles, and methods spruced by the
psychologists of religion.
TRS 310 Professional Ethics (3)
This course will examine the question of whether
professional morality is independent of and separate
from ordinary morality. It will look at business, medicine,
law and political ethics.

TRS 221 The Politics of Gender (3)
This course will discuss the roles and contributions of
men and women in nation building. It will examine in
particular the disadvantaged position women hold in
most societies.

TRS 311 Metaphysics II: Ideal Ism (3)
This course will study issues of particular importance
in the philosophy of the metaphysical idealists George
Berkeley, Immanuel Kant, George W. F. Hegel and others.
Concepts such as existence, being causality, change, time
and other shall be examined.

TRS 222 Religion and Development (3)
This course undertakes a study of religion amidst social
transformation in different countries with special
reference to sub-Saharan Africa. In the process of
assessing the role of religion, taking into account
the theories of development, secularization and
modernization, it also looks at the paradigms in conflict
in the socio-political and economic spheres.

TRS 312 Logic II: Logic and the Sciences (3)
This course will examine the place of logic in philosophy,
the sciences, and other human activities and relations.
It will study the concepts (in) validity and soundness of
arguments, and the different patterns that arguments
can follow. It will consider the benefits of symbols
and will introduce students to the use of elementary
symbolic language.

TRS 301 Christology (3)
This course will study the meaning and significance
of the person of Jesus Christ. It will examine critically
the life of Jesus from the time of his conception to
his resurrection and the developing understanding
of Christology through the first five years of Christian
thought.

TRS 313 History of Christianity: Medieval To Reformation
(3)
This course will study the development of the church
from the Middle Ages to the Reformation. It will examine
the separation between Eastern and Western Christianity,
scholasticism, sacramentalism and opposition to
monarchic papacy.

TRS 302 Missionaries in Nineteenth Century Southern
Africa (3)
This course will investigate early missionaries’ attitudes
toward African culture, beliefs and practices. It will draw
much of its information from primary sources.

TRS 314 Christian Moral Theology (3)
This course will examine the moral implications of being
a Christian in a secular society in the context of the
teachings of the Christian church. It will focus on issues
related to Christian behaviour in regard to marriage and
other ethical issues.

TRS 303 Creation and the Bible (3)
This course will focus on the creation texts of the Hebrew
Bible. They will be compared and contrasted with other
ancient Near Eastern creation accounts. This will also
examine creation in the New Testament.
TRS 304 African Philosophy and Culture (3)
This course will examine how philosophy and culture
have interacted in an African context. It will investigate
the thought of several African thinkers.
TRS 305 Judaism (3)
This course will present an introduction to the main
beliefs and practices of the several forms of post-biblical
Judaism. The course will cover some of the milestones of
the history of the Jewish people.

TRS 315 Sociology of Religion (3)
This course will study the influence of religion in society.
It will examine sociological theories of religion and the
concrete interaction of religion and particular societies.
TRS 316 History of Mythology (3)
This course will study the presentation of Jesus in the four
gospels. It will investigate how each gospel characterizes
Jesus and the significance of such characterisation, as
well as the character of Jesus that emerges in Paul’s
writings.
TRS 317 Theology: The Co-existence of God and Evil (3)
This course will examine various philosophical
arguments for the existence of God. It will discuss the

153

ontological, cosmological, and teleological arguments
for the existence of God. It will examine the problem
of Evil and the difficulties it poses for arguments for the
existence of God.
TRS 318 Beginning Biblical Hebrew II: Translation of
Biblical Texts (3)
This course is a continuation of Beginning Biblical
Hebrew I.
TRS 319 Philosophy of Religion (3)
This course will study some fundamental issues
connected with the human activity called “religion”.
It will use rational, critical analysis to investigate the
nature of belief, worship, and sacrifice, and the roles
that religion plays in the lives of human beings. It will
examine the validity of the argument from miracles,
moral argument, and religious experience as proofs of
God’s existence.
TRS 320 Epistemology II: Theories of Truth (3)
This course will examine the concepts of knowledge
and belief and relate them to theories of truth. It will
discuss theories such as the “correspondence theory”,
the “coherence theory”, and the “pragmatist theory”.
TRS 321 Metaphysics III: Body/mind Problem (3)
This course looks at the mind and body problem. It will
examine different theories that arose as an attempt to
answer the questions concerning dualism, behaviourism,
functionalism, epiphenomenalism and others.
TRS 322 History of Christianity in Southern Africa (3)
This course will study the origin and development of the
Christian Church in Southern Africa from its inception
to the present. It will examine the cultural context
in which the Church was introduced and the role of
foreign missionary societies in that process.
TRS 323 Intermediate Greek II: Translation of Selected
Texts (3)
This course will build on the knowledge of New
Testament vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired
in Beginning Koine Greek I and II and intermediate
Koine Greek I. Students will translate and study closely
selected passages from one book of the New Testament.
TRS 324 Intermediaries Arabic I: Arabic Grammar (3)
This course will study intermediate Arabic grammar and
examine classical and contemporary Arabic texts. It will
also expose the student to standard Arabic oral drills.
TRS 325 Foundation Structures of Islam (3)
This course will study the basic doctrines and practices
of Islam. It will introduce the primary sources of Islam
and survey the social history of the Muslim community
from its emergence through its early years.
TRS 326 Directed Readings: Research Methods (3)
In this course the student will undertake independent
study under the guidance of a supervisor who will be
responsible for advising and instructing the student in
matters of research method as well as content.
TRS 401 New Religious Movements (3)
This course will examine new Christian theologies from
new Christian movements emerging today in various
regional, social and intellectual settings across the
world. It will pay special attention to theological and
social developments in Africa.
TRS 402 Religion And Politics (3)

This course will foster a rethinking of the relationship
between religion and politics and analyze the changing
dimensions of society, religion, and the state.
TRS403 The Doctrine of Sin In The Bible (3)
This course examines the concepts of “Sin” and “evil”
in the Hebrew Bible and the Christian New Testament.
It will investigate related concepts such as law and
commandment, purity/impurity, judgement, punishment,
and forgiveness.
TRS 404 Metaphysics IV: Personal Identity (3)
This course will examine the question of personhood. The
course will look at different criteria of personal identity.
It will also look at divided minds and consciousness.
TRS 405 Intermediate Hebrew: Examination of Selected
Texts (3)
This course will build on the knowledge of Biblical Hebrew
vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired in Beginning
Biblical Hebrew I and II. The student will study closely set
texts from all three main divisions of the Hebrew Bible.
TRS 406 Intermediate Arabic II: Translation of Arabic
Texts (3)
This course is continuation of Intermediate Arabic I yet
students who have not successfully completed that
course may take TRS 406.
TRS 407 Socio-Cultural, Legal and Political Structures of
Islam (3)
This course will study the growth of the early Muslim
community. It will trace and reflect critically upon
the development and evolution of the theological,
jurisprudential and mystical schools. It will explore the
thoughts and practices of individual representatives of
these schools.
TRS 409 African Christianity Theologies (3)
This course will comprise readings from African
theologians that focus on important theological issues
facing the African Church today. It will examine the
question of the enculturation of the Church in Africa,
taking into account the cultural, social, economic and
political factors in both colonial and postcolonial Africa.
TRS 410 Theories of Government (3)
This course will discuss the theory of the state, such
thinkers as Plato, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, JeanJacques Rousseau and Karl Marx have presented it.
TRS 411 Politics and the Development of Biblical Thought
(3)
This course will foreground the idea that the texts of
the Bible were written, collected, edited and read in
political environments. Political agendas, in turn, have
left discernible traces in biblical literature.
TRS 412 Ecumenical Theology (3)
This course will study the theological foundations of the
ecumenical movement, whose aim is to achieve organic
church unity. It will investigate the New Testament,
especially the Johannine and Pauline writings, to discern
the scriptural basis for ecumenical theory and practice.

TRS 413 Hinduism (3)
This course will study Hinduism from the Harrappan
culture to contemporary period. The approach will be
thematic including themes such as creation, sacrifice,
polytheism and others.
TRS 414 Metaphysics V: Materialism (3)

This course will examine the main tenets of materialism:
the uniformity of law, the denial of teleology, the denial
of any form of existence beyond that envisaged by the
natural sciences. Particularly attention will be given
to the thought of Karl Marx, William James and John
Dewey.
TRS 415 Twentieth Century Theologians (3)
This course will study several major theologians,
Protestant and Roman Catholic, of the twentieth century,
and the contributions their thought has made to the
development of contemporary systematic theology.
TRS 416 Religion and Modernity (3)
This course will study the relationship and interaction
between religion and popular culture. It will explore the
significance and importance of religious expressions
contained in various media such as films, theatre, music
and others.
TRS 417 Paul’s Epistle (3)
This course will cover the Pauline and Deutero- Pauline
letters of the New Testament. It will use different
methods to analyze the socio historical context that
gave rise to Pauline letters.
TRS 418 Contemporary African Philosophy (3)
This course will study some of the major issues that have
shaped, and continue to shape, African’s social, economic
and political landscape. It will examine the development
and application of such theories as humanism, African
socialism and others.
TRS 419 Intermediate Hebrew II: Hebrew Texts and Dead
Sea Scrolls (3)
This course will build on the knowledge of Biblical Hebrew
vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired in Beginning
Biblical Hebrew I and II. Set texts from the Hebrew Bible
and the Dead Sea Scrolls will be studied closely.
TRS 420 Directed Research (3)
In this course the student will undertake independent
study under the guidance of a supervisor who will be
responsible for advising and instructing the student in
matters of research method as well as content.
TRS 421History of Christianity: Modern and
Contemporary (3)
This course will study the expansion of the church from
Europe and America to other parts of the world during
the missionary era of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. It will discuss issues such as colonialism and
missiology.
TRS 422 Epistemology: Rationalism and Empiricism (3)
The student will study the philosophy position that
knowledge is only attained through the senses, and that
truth must conform to the rules of logic and of material
science.
TRS 423 History of Contemporary Philosophy (3)
This course will study the basic tenets of logical positivism
and ordinary language philosophy. It will also explore
philosophical questions that arise from contemporary
concerns such as war and peace and others.
TRS 424 Buddhism (3)
This course will study the origin, development and
basic concepts of Buddhism. It will trace ways in which
different “Buddhisms” developed.
TRS 425 The Theology of the Reformation (3)
This course will study the religious, social economic and
political factors that led to the Reformation and counter
–Reformation in the sixteenth century Europe. It will

154

consider some of the important theological themes that
dominated the thinking of the Reformers.
TRS 426 Religious Rituals and Sacred Places (3)
This course will study the role of sacred sites, shrines,
rivers, mountains, worship centers and other sacred
places in several religious traditions.
TRS 427 Applied Ethics (3)
This course will study the concept of human rights, the
nature and origin of human rights, and some specific
contemporary ethical issues that arise from the question
of human rights, such as abortion, infanticide and others
TRS 428 Religion and Pluralism (3)
This course will discuss the relationship between religion
and religious pluralism. It will explore the theories
pertaining to religious pluralism, and probe the related
notions or religious language, religious dialogue and
inter-religious cooperation.
BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE IN PASTORAL STUDIES
(BAPS)
6. PROGRAMME REGULATIONS
6.1 Entry qualification: As per University General
Regulations 1.1.1
6.2 The B.A in Pastoral Studies (BAPS) will be offered
as a Single Major Subject (22.42) and a Combined
Major /Major programme (22.43); (as defined in
Faculty Special Regulation 22.44).
6.3 All courses offered in the B. A in Pastoral Studies
will be semester long.
6.4 Unless indicated otherwise all courses will carry
3 credits.
6.5 .Not all courses listed may be offered in any one
semester.
6.6 Students pursuing a Single Major in BAPS will be
required to take a total of 130 credits consisting
of 108 credits in BAPS comprising 84 credits from
the core courses and additional 22 credits from
the optional and GEC/Elective courses.
6.7 Students pursuing a Major in BAPS as part of a
combined Major/Major are required to take a
total of 76 credits consisting of 54 credits in
BAPS comprising 48 credits from the core courses
and additional 22 credits from the optional and
Elective/GCE courses.
6.8 Unless otherwise specified in the published course
description or in a written syllabus distributed
by the instructor to the students during the
first week of class lectures, course assessment
will be by two written assignments or two term
tests, and a final examination, weighted 1: 1: 2
respectively.
6.9 Students from other departments and other
faculties, who wish to take BAPS courses as
general education courses or electives, may take
any course. They are advised, however, to take
courses from the first and second levels since
these are generally more introductory in nature.
6.10 Students pursuing a Single Major in BAPS are
recommended to include Biblical languages
either Hebrew (for Old Testament) or Greek (for
New Testament).
6. 11 All students pursuing a Single Major in BAPS will

be required to take TRS 408 Directed Research
I: Research Methods and TRS 420-Directed
Research II: Research Project

Level four
Semester 7
Two core courses and one optional course

6.12 All students pursuing a Single Major in BAPS
will be required to undergo internship during
the long break between the sixth and seventh
semester of their academic programme at a
church, hospital, clinic, prison, army, college
or secondary school of their choice under the
supervision of a member of TRS staff.

Semester 8
Two core courses and one optional course

PROGRAMME STRUCTURE
SINGLE MAJOR PROGRAMME
Level 100
Semester 1
TRS 101 and any other two core courses;
one optional course and two GECs
Semester 2
TRS 107 and any other two core courses;
one optional course and two GECs

Award and classification of BAPS
In order to be awarded a degree in BAPS, a student
must have passed all courses offered in the programme
and the degree shall be classified in accordance with
the provisions of the General Regulation 20.4 with the
cumulative GPA computed in accordance with General
Academic Regulation 00.86.
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE FOR THE BACHELOR OF ARTS
DEGREE IN PASTORAL STUDIES
Level 100

Semester 4
TRS209 and any other two core courses; one optional
course, and one Elective/GEC

Semester 1
Core Courses
TRS101
Introduction to Biblical Studies (3)
EFH100
Foundation of Guidance and Counseling (3)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
PST101
Psychological Foundations of Pastoral
Counseling (3)
COM111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I(3)
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (3)

Level 300
Semester 4
core courses; one optional course and one
Elective/GEC

Optional Courses
TRS103
Religions of Botswana (3)
DSW101 Social work with communities and 		
groups (3)

Semester 5
Four core courses; one optional course and one Elective
GEC

Level 100
Semester 2
Core Courses
TRS107
African Traditional Religions (3)
BSW104 Introduction to Social Work (3)
EFH102
Indigenous Guidance and counselling
Techniques (3
DSW108 Interpersonal Communication (3)
COM112 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (3)
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals II (2)
Optional courses
TRS109
Biblical Interpretation (3)
PST102
Stewardship (3)
PST103
Christian Leadership(3)
PST104
Hospital Ministry (3)

Level 200
Semester 3
TRS207 and any other two core courses;
one optional course, and one Elective/GEC

Level 400
Semester 7
Four core courses and one optional course in semester
seven
Semester 8
Four core courses and one optional course in semester
eight
MAJOR/MAJOR PROGRAMME
Level 100
Semester 1
Two core courses and two GECs
Semester 2
Two core courses and two GECs
Level 200
Semester 3
Two core courses and one Elective/GEC
Semester 4
Two core courses and one Elective/GEC
Level Three
Semester 5
Two core courses and one Elective/GEC
Semester 6
Two core courses and one Elective/GEC

Semester 3
Core Courses
TRS 207 Introduction to Christian Theology (3)
EFH 202 Theories and techniques of counselling (3)
PSY 201 Theories of personality (3)
BSW 201 Introduction to working with families
and individuals (3
Optional courses
TRS204
Theologies of Gender (3)
TRS206
Beginning Biblical Greek I: New 		
Testament Greek (3)
TRS208
The Hebrew Bible as History and Story (3)
PST201
Christian Spirituality (3)
PST202
Introduction to Christian Education (3)
PST203
Religion and Development (3)
PSY203
Developmental Psychology of 		
Childhood and Adolescent (3)
HIS 201
African cultures and civilisations to

155

c.1500 (3)
Core Courses
Semester4
TRS 209 History of Christian Thought (3)
PST 204 Pastoral Care and Counselling (3)
PSY 102 Biological Basis of Human Behaviour(3)
DSW 203 AIDS and Home Based Care(3)
Optional courses
TRS210
Gospel Narratives
TRS212
Beginning Biblical Greek II: New 		
Testament Greek (3)
PST205
Liturgical Studies (worship) (3)
TRS 213 Johannien Corpus (3)
EFH 204 Ethical and Legal Issues in Counselling (3)
PSY206
Developmental Psychology of 		
Adulthood and Old Age (3)
Semester 5
Core courses
PST301
Systematic Theology I: The Divine 		
Essence (3)
PST302
Homiletics (3)
EFH308
Family and Marriage Counseling (3)
PST303
Institutional Chaplaincy (3
Optional courses
TRS302
Missionaries in 19th Century Southern
Africa (3)
TRS306
Intermediate Greek I: Examination of
selected texts
TRS308
Beginning Biblical Hebrew I: 		
Introduction to Hebrew Scripture (3)
PST304
Reading the Bible in the context of HIV
and AIDS (3)
PST305
Prophecy in the Hebrew Bible (3)
PSY304
Health Psychology (3)
ENG333 Critical Issues in Modern African Literature:
Phases of Modern African Literature (3)
Semester Six
Core courses
PST306
Systematic Theology II: Anthropology (3)
TRS314
Christian Moral Theology (3)
EFH304
HIV Counselling (3)
PST307
Internship (3)
Optional courses
TRS315
Sociology of Religion (3)
TRS318
Beginning Biblical Hebrew II: Translation
of Hebrew Texts (3)
TRS319
Philosophy of Religion (3)
TRS323
Intermediate Greek II: Translation of
selected texts (3)
PST308
Prophetic Ministry in contemporary
society (3)
PST309
World Religions (3)
HIS344
The Roots of Crisis in Modern Central
Africa (3)
Semester Seven
Core courses
PST401
Systematic Theology III: Ecclesiological
Studies (3)
TRS403
The doctrine of sin in the Bible (3)
PST402
The History of the Church in Botswana (3)
TRS408
Directed Research I: Research Method (3)
Optional courses
TRS401
New Religious Movements (3)
TRS405
Intermediate Hebrew I: Examination of
Selected Hebrew Texts (3)
TRS412
Ecumenical Theology (3)

PST 403
PST 404
PST 405
ALL 452

Liberation Theologies I: Latin American
and Black Theologies (3)
Theology of Hope and Compassion (3)
Religion and the Environment (3)
Popular Culture in Africa (3)

Semester 8
Core courses
PST 406 Mission and Evangelism (3)
PST 407
History and doctrine of Pentecostal
Christianity (3)
PST 407
Media and Pastoral Studies (3)
TRS 420 Directed Research II: Research Project (3)
Optional courses
PST 409 Theology of the African Independent
Churches (3)
PST 410
Liberation Theologies II: African and
Feminist Christian Theologies (3)
TRS 415 Twentieth Century Theologians (3)
TRS 417 Paul’s Epistles (3)
TRS 419 Intermediate Hebrew II: Hebrew Text and
Dead Sea Scrolls (3)
TRS 425 The theology of the Reformation (3)
ALL 456 Introduction to African Thought (3)

COURSE DISCRIPTION
LEVEL 100
PST 101
Psychological Foundations of Pastoral
Counselling
This course will study some elements of foundational
psychology, which form the basis of effective and holistic
forms of pastoral counseling in the life of individuals
and communities for purposes of understanding,
preventing and relieving psychologically based distress
in order to promote good mental health and personal
development. It will explore how a good understanding
of modern psychological thought can help the pastoral
counselor to deal with different aspects of the clients’
psycho-social and moral problems and help them to
connect with their spiritual centre. The course will help
students to understand the role of mental functions and
how these affect individual and social behavior. Issues
such as human development, emotions, personality,
interpersonal relationships, the development of the
human mind throughout the life span and others shall
be examined.
TRS 101 Introduction to Biblical Studies
This course will present a general overview of the context
in which the Old Testament and the New testament
came into being and a survey of the contents of both
testaments. It will consider various ways in which the
Bible is used in Judaism and Christianity. It will examine
selected OT and NT texts in their historical, geographical
and literary contexts, and will discuss some key concepts
(such as covenant, canon, monotheism, salvation,
kingdom of heaven etc.).
TRS 103 Religions of Botswana
This course will study the different religions that exist in
Botswana with the view towards a better understanding
of their beliefs, rituals, and practices. It will survey
ATR, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Bahai, Sikhism and
Buddhism as they have developed are currently practiced
in Botswana
FH100
Foundation of Guidance and Counseling
The course is designed to assist learners to understand
the basic concepts and principles of guidance and
counseling. It facilitates insight into the guidance

counselor’s professional roles in the school and
community.
PSY 101 Introduction to Psychology
This is a foundation course to the study of psychology
as a scientific discipline and it introduces students to
major themes in psychology such as cognition, emotion,
behavior, intelligence, learning and motivation from
various theoretical perspectives.
DSW 101 Social work with communities and groups
SEMESTER TWO
TRS 107 African Traditional Religions
This course will study the beliefs and practices of
African Traditional Religions from a phenomenological
perspective point of view. It will focus in particular
on the traditional religions of Southern Africa. It will
examine in detail such themes as deities, ritual specialists,
intermediaries and mediation.
BSW 104: Introduction to Social Work
EFH 102 Indigenous Guidance and Counselling
Techniques Synopsis (This course is in place)
DSW 108 Interpersonal Communication
TRS 109 Biblical Interpretation
This course will study different methods, both modern
and contemporary of reading the Bible. It will explore
modern historical critical methods like textual, form,
compositional and redactional criticism. It will also
examine more recently developed methods like literacy
approaches (rhetorical, narrative and reader response
criticism), approaches drawn from sociological theory
and practice and from social anthropology, and liberation
approaches (including such hermeneutics as womanists/
feminist, post-colonial, “reading with non-academic
readers” , two-thirds world hermeneutics” and the like.
Course Code and Title: PST 102- Stewardship
This course will study the meaning of stewardship in
the context of the church specifically and the society
in general. The study will be based on the doctrine of
creation of human beings in the image and likeness of
God and their responsibility in managing God’s world
as managers. Themes covered will include management
of God’s people in the church, management of church
funds, management of the environment and other
resources that God has given to the world. The theology
of stewardship will also be discussed.
PST 103 -Christian Leadership
This course explores the inter-relationship between
professional leadership and biblical vitality and
leadership. This course trains students on the skills of
day to day management of a church or congregation.
Students study different forms of church polity and
administration and are guided on how they can plan
for their administrative activities as administrators,
managers and leaders in line with the philosophy of their
churches.
PST 104-Hospital Ministry
This is a supervised course in hospital chaplaincy. It will
introduce students to doing pastoral work in the context
of a hospital or clinic for a period of semester. Candidates
will be guided on how to work with doctors, nurses and
other hospital attend as well as to how give counseling
to patients as well as conduct prayers for the sick and
staff. Students will be exposed to some elements of
medical ethics so that they can know how to deal with
patients with confidence and confidentiality.

156

TRS 112-Bible and Gender
This course will explore the construction of gender and
identity in the Hebrew and Christian Testaments. It will
examine how different types of biblical literature (las,
prophecy, wisdom, gospels, epistles, apocalypses etc)
construct gender over various times and circumstances.
It will investigate how biblical constructions affect the
status of women and men in contemporary world. It
will also investigate how various biblical readers have
responded to the prevailing gender constructions and
their impact on the lives of women and men in biblical (
Christian & Jewish )nations.
LEVEL TWO
SEMESTER THREE
TRS 207 Introduction to Christian Theology
This course will study the nature of theology, its different
branches and its relevance to society. It will focus on the
different methods used in doing theology, its sources,
its relationships with other sciences and its application.
Selected doctrines such as God, creation, sin, Christology,
salvation, faith, grace, sacraments, prayer, the last things
and others shall be discussed from within the African
context.
EFH 202-Theories and techniques of counselling
The course examines the extent to which counseling
could be used to facilitate behavioral change in clients.
The multicultural aspects of counseling as well as ethical
and other issues relating to the therapeutic process will
be learnt and applied to case studies.
PSY-Theories of personality
BSW 201-Introduction to working with families and
individuals
The course sensitizes students to goal oriented
approaches to working with distressed individuals and
families. Topics covered include: Theories and approaches
to integrated social work practice; and the processes and
phases of intervention with individuals and families.
Course Code and Title: TRS 204 Theologies of Gender
This course will explore theological questions
surrounding the issues of gender and gender identity t
(male, female, transgendered) and of sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual). It will examine
traditional theological positions as well as feminist/
womanist, gay, lesbian and queer theologians. It will also
consider documents from different Christian churches
and church organizations on gender issues.
TRS 206 Beginning Biblical Greek I: New Testament Greek
TRS 208 The Hebrew Bible as History and Story
This course will study both the historical texts in the
Hebrew Bible and the eternal historical factors that
have shaped the formation of the Hebrew Bible. It will
examine in detail the theological focus and agenda of
the Hebrew Bible historical texts. It will also consider
ostensibly historical narratives in the Hebrew Bible that
appear to be more concerned with “telling a good story”.
The question of the course titled will be explored from
several different angles and with a variety of critical
approaches. Particular attention will be paid to selections
from the following texts: Deuteronomistic history, 1 & 2
Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah and Ruth.
PST 201- Christian Spirituality
This course examines Christian spirituality as expressed
in various contexts of the Christian tradition. It will draw
resources in classical Christian texts, religious movements
such as monasticism and others. Other spiritualties

prevalent in Botswana today such as Islamic, Hindu,
Buddhist and African Traditional Religious spiritualities
shall also be examined.
PST 202-Introduction to Christian Education
The course will serve as an introduction to the ministry
of Christian education. This course will focus on the
teachings of the church for practical leaving. It will
expose students to various teachings of the church in
relation to human behavior, interpersonal relationships,
the virtues of Christian life, bible knowledge,
PST 203-Religion and Development
This course will examine the role of religion in
development. Various sociological theories such as those
of Max Weber, Karl Marx and others will be discussed.
The course will also focus on the contribution of religion
in the development of the African continent generally
and Botswana in particular. Particular attention will paid
to religion’s contribution to world peace and solidarity
among nations. Religious conflicts as a disruption force
to development shall also be discussed.
PSY 203-Developmental Psychology of childhood and
adolescence
This course traces human development through prenatal
period, infancy and childhood up to adolescence.
Emphasis is placed on physical, cognitive, emotional and
social development and relevant theories.
HIS 201-African cultures and civilisations to c 1500
A survey of pre-colonial Africa discussing selected
themes in prehistory, state formation, trade and smallscale societies. Including the origin and spread of modern
humans, their languages and cultures, Nile civilisations,
Christianity and Islam, Sudanic states, early trade on the
East Coast and the rise and fall of Great Zimbabwe.
SEMESTER FOUR
TRS 209 –History of Christian Thought
This course will study the development of Christianity and
Christian thought from the New Testament period to its
establishment as the state religion of the Roman Empire
under Constantine . It will emphasize relations between
the Church and the state and how these affected the life
of the Church and of Christian believers. It will explore
the development of Christian doctrine from the New
Testament through patristic period and the role played
by the early church councils in formulating doctrines.
PTS 204-Pastoral Care and Counselling
This is an introductory course into the skills, techniques
and practice of pastoral counseling leading to
specific types of counseling. The course examines the
psychological mental conditions of clients, the biblical,
theological and ethical bases of pastoral counseling and
methods of pastoral counseling. These include person to
person counseling, group therapy, counseling through
worship, prayer meetings, bible study and others.
Emphasis is placed on spiritual growth and development
of clients as they make decisions for reconciliation and
unity within themselves, with others and with God
leading to righteous living.
PSY 102-Biological basis of Human Behaviour
This course is an introduction to essential topics in the
area of psychobiology and its historical, contextual and
empirical development. It deals with the basic units
of the central and peripheral nervous system, neuroanatomy and physiology. It establishes a foundation in
understanding the brain-behaviour relationship.
DSW 203-AIDS and Home Based Care

TRS 210-Gospel Narratives
This course will study the gospels of the New Testament,
Mark, Matthew, Luke and John. Students will study the
gospels through employing different perspectives such as
historical, literacy, sociological and liberation methods. It
will also explore some contemporary uses of the gospels
in literature, films, songs, art, folklore, political rhetoric
and environmental HIV/AIDS concerns.
TRS 212 Beginning Biblical Hebrew II: New Testament
Greek
This course is a continuation of Beginning Koine Greek I.
PST 205 Liturgical studies (Worship)
This course is a survey of the history, practice and
theology of Christian worship with particular attention
to modern church practices. Topics discussed include the
ministry of the Word, the celebration of the Lord’s Supper,
weddings, funerals, baptisms, and other ceremonies in
accordance with different church traditions namely
Mainline Churches, Pentecostal Churches, and African
Independent Churches.
TRS 213-Johannine Corpus
This course will study the Johannine corpus both the
Gospel of John and the Epistles of John. It will examine
the historical, philosophical and political factors that
shaped its theology in the apostolic period.
EFH 204-Ethical and Legal Issues in Counselling
The course is an introduction to ethical and legal issues
in the professional practice of counseling. The course
examines codes of ethics, standards and legislations
governing the provision of counseling services.
PSY 206-Developmental Psychology of Adulthood and
Old Age
This course examines life-span development during
early, middle and late adulthood considering biological,
cognitive, emotional and social factors and the relevance
of life events (e.g. marriage, parenthood, divorce, first
employment, unemployment, retirement, illness and
death) for development.
LEVEL THREE
PST 301 Systematic Theology I: The Divine Essence
This course examines the concept of God and God’s
relationship with human beings and the created universe
from a Christian perspective. It examines the doctrines of
Trinity, Incarnation, Christology and Pneumatology both
from a Western tradition and African perspectives.
PST 302-Homiletics
This course introduces the student into the science of
preaching. It examines things such as sources, sermon
preparation, sermon delivery and sermon evaluation. The
use of the Bible, Christian ethics, systematic theology,
experiences of the community, personal experience and
other branches of knowledge in sermon preparation will
be explored. The course will involve actual preaching in
the context of the church and a critical examination of
the same.
EFH 308 Family and Marriage Counselling
The course explores the indigenous and modern
marriage and family counseling structures with the view
to provide culture-sensitive on issues of marriage, sex
and family adjustment.
PST 303 –Institutional Chaplaincy
This course equips students to carry out chaplaincy
work in hospitals, clinics, army barracks, the Police

157

force, schools and the like. Students will be attached
to an institution of their choice and will be guided by a
supervisor on how to carry out their internship there at
the end of which they are expected to write and submit a
report. The report will be graded on pass/fail basis.
TRS 302-Missionaries in 19th Century South Africa
This course will investigate early missionaries’ attitude
toward African culture, beliefs and practices. It will
draw much of its information from primary sources,
namely the writings and teachings of the missionaries
themselves.
TRS 306 Intermediate Greek I: Examination of selected
texts
This course will build on the knowledge of New
Testament vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired in
Beginning Koine Greek I and II. The student will study
closely some selected texts from all four of the main
divisions of the New Testament (Gospels, History, Epistles
and Apocalypse).
TRS 308 Beginning Biblical Hebrew I: Introduction to
Hebrew Scripture
This course will introduce the student to the Hebrew
script and teach them how to write it. It studies basic
Hebrew grammar and how to read basic prescribed texts.
PST 304 Reading the Bible in the context of HIV and AIDS
This courses enables students to read the Bible in the
context of HIV and AIDS pandemic. It examines the
various situations that call for compassion and love in
times of adversity and explores the meaning of love,
suffering, caring and forbearing in the midst of natural
disasters. It explores both the Old and New Testaments
and see what these testaments say about the love of God
in relation to the suffering humanity in modern times.
PST 305-Prophecy in the Hebrew Bible
This course will examine the tradition of classic Hebrew
Prophets both major and minor prophets of Israel such as
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Amos, Hosea, Micah, Zephaniah,
and others. It will examine their social, economic,
religious and political background. It will also examine
their theology especially with reference to Yahwism,
the concept of sin, ethics, the divine kingship and their
involvement in political processes of the Kingdom of
Judah and Israel before and after the exile.
PSY 304-Health Psychology
This is an applied psychology course that focuses on
the contributions of psychology to the understanding
of physical and mental health and illness with regard to
prevention and intervention, behavioural, environmental,
psychosocial and cultural factors that may affect health
and illness and addressed and applied to various fields
of health psychology such as cardiology, oncology,
rehabilitation and HIV and AIDS.
ENG 333-Critical issues in Modern African Literature:
Phases of Modern African Literature
An examination of the major critical issues and trends in
Modern African Literature using both creative materials
and critical works of African authors.
PST 306 Systematic Theology II: Anthropology
This course examines the nature of human beings and
their place in Salvation History. The course examines
the doctrine of creation, hamartiology, soteriology and
eschatology from a Christian perspective. As far as
possible reference shall be made to the African culture
and explore how these doctrines can be expressed using
African cultural concepts and stories. Comparison shall
also be made with similar doctrines in other world

religions.
TRS 314 Christian Moral Theology
This course will examine the moral implications of being
a Christian in a secular society in the context of the
teachings of the Christian Church. It will focus on issues
related to Christian behavior in regard to marriage and
sex, sanctity of life, the use of force, the freedom of the
Christian, the question of sin and evil, the problems of
wealth, crime and punishment, Christian values and such
like.
EFH 304 HIV Counselling
The course is an overview of basic anatomy, physiology,
and the normal functioning of body system with
emphasis on HIV/AIDS. The course will focus on
approaches applicable to HIV/AIDS patients and provision
of care and support services. Emphasis on problems and
issues encountered throughout the life span of a family
and societal and cultural implications. The course will
provide awareness and understanding of HIV/AIDS and
the role of counselors in education the society.
Course Code and Title: PST 307 –Internship
In this course a student will be placed for personal
exposure at a clinic, school, college, hospital, prison,
church on any other institution for a period of at least 30
days where the student can learn something in practical
terms in area of counseling, pastoral care or any other
necessary experience for ministry. At the report of the
placement a report shall be submitted to the supervision
and it will be graded on pass or fail basis.
TRS 315-Sociology of Religion
This course will study the influence of religion in society.
It will examine sociological theories of religion and the
concrete interaction of religion and particular societies.
In particular, it will explore the ways in which religions
are a source of peace and stability (that is, a conservator
of values) as well as of social change and conflict.
TRS 318-Beginning Biblical Hebrew II: Translation of
Hebrew texts.
This course is a continuation of Beginning Hebrew I.
TRS 319-Philosophy of Religion
This course will study some fundamental issues
connected with the human activity called religion. It will
use rational, critical analysis to investigate the nature of
belief, worship, and sacrifice, the question of existence of
a supernatural being, and the roles that religion plays in
the lives of human beings.
TRS 323 Intermediate Greek II: Translation of selected
texts
This course will build on the knowledge of New Testament
vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired in Beginning
Koine Greek I and II (and possibly, intermediate Koine
I). Students will translate and study closely selected
passages from one book of the New Testament. They will
also explore some exegetical methods, such as textual,
redactional, rhetorical and narrative criticism and apply
them to the selected book. The course will also discuss
problems associated with the theory and practice of
translation.
PST 308 Prophetic ministry in contemporary society
This course will examine the prophetic ministry of the
Church as derived from the prophetic ministry of the
prophets in the Old Testaments and Prophets in the New
Testament. Great emphasis will be placed on the prophetic
ministry of Christ and the mission of the Church to the
world in a globalized context and multiculturalism. The
role of the Church as the voice of the voiceless shall be

examined. The Church’s role of advocacy for social justice
and human rights especially of minority groups shall be
discussed. The issues of corruption and other moral ills
in society will form part of the discussion.
PST 309 World Religions
This course will examine the origin and development
of a number of world religions such as, Judaism, Islam,
Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Bahai and others. Their
main teachings will be discussed and their interaction
with other world religions in the world stage will be
examined.
HIS 344-The Roots of Crisis in Modern Central Africa
Students should be able to appreciate the major
historical episodes which have shaped modern Central
Africa. They should be able to relate these events to a
broader environment including comparable historical
events in different regions of Africa and to the wider
world in general.
LEVEL FOUR
PST 401 Systematic Theology III: Ecclesiological studies
This course examines doctrines that are related to the
nature and work of the Christian church. It examines the
concept of the Church, the sacraments or ordinances of
the Church, divine grace, from both western traditional
perspective and African perspective.
TRS 403-The Doctrine of Sin in the Bible
This course will examine the concepts of sin and evil
in the Hebrew Bible and the Christian New Testament.
It will also investigate related concepts such as law
and commandment, ritual purity/impurity, powers
of evil (Satan, evil spirits), judgment, punishment
and forgiveness. Biblical texts will be drawn from the
commandments and the laws of the Torah, from the
social critiques of the prophets, from the traditional
teaching of the sages and the challenge to it in the book
of Job, and from the preaching of Jesus as reflected in
the Gospels and elaborated in the Epistles.
PST 402-The History of the Church in Botswana
This course examines the origin, development and
expansion of the Church in Botswana. It surveys the
traditional culture of the Batswana prior to the coming
of the missionaries and how it impacted on the lives of
the people. The course places emphasis on the activities
of the missionaries in Botswana through the activities
of missionary societies such as the LMS and others.
Missionary activities of key figures such as Robert
Moffat, David Livingstone and others are discussed.
Missionary strategies in the missionary field are also
discussed and the peoples’ response to such strategies
are examined. The rise of New Religious Movements as
a reaction against missionary cultural imperialism are
also examined leading to faster growth of Christianity
in Botswana.
TRS 408-Directed Research I: Research Methods
In this course the student will undertake independent
study under the guidance of a supervisor who will be
responsible for advising and instructing the student in
matters of research methods as well as content.
TRS 401-New Religious Movements
This course will examine the Christian theologies
emerging today in various regional, social and
intellectual settings across the world. It will consider
theological developments in such contexts as the twothirds world, with special attention to Africa and New
Religious Movements.

158

TRS 405-Intermediate Hebrew I: Examination of selected
Hebrew texts
This course will build on the knowledge of Biblical Hebrew
vocabulary, grammar and syntax acquired in Beginning
Biblical Hebrew I and II. The student will study closely set
texts from all three main divisions of the Hebrew Bible
(Torah, Prophets and Writings).
TRS 412-Ecumenical Theology
This course will study the theological foundations of the
ecumenical movement, whose aim is to achieve organic
church unity. It will investigate the New Testament,
especially the johannine and Pauline writings, to discern
the spiritual basis for ecumenical theory and practice.
It will also examine the different theological models of
ecumenism and the institutional positions on ecumenism
expounded by the Roman Catholic Church and various
Protestant Churches. Among the documents discussed
will be those of the Second Vatican Council and agreed
statements between various churches, particularly
those between the Roman Catholic Church on the one
hand and the Orthodox Churches, the Anglicans and
the Lutherans on the other. The course will attempt
to determine the direction in which the ecumenical
movement is developing.
PST 403-Liberation Theologies I-Latin American and
Black Theologies
This course examines Theologies of Liberation in Latin
America and Black Theology in North America and their
spread to other parts of the world especially to South
Africa. It examines their origins, methods of theologizing,
main theological tenets and their impact in third world
countries. The contribution of liberation theologians
such as Gustavo Gutierrez, Juan Segundo, James Cones
and others shall be examined.
PST 404 -Theology of hope and Compassion
This course examines the biblical foundations of the
theology of hope and compassion and their translability
and applicability in the era of HIV and AIDS. The emphasis
is on combating stigma against people infected and
affected by the HIV and AIDS pandemic in order to
promote a holistic society. Faith healing as practiced in
the Old Testament, New Testament, in the early church
and in the church generally today are discussed.
PST 405-Religion and the Environment
This course examines the role of religion in the
maintenance, preservation and promotion of
environmental issues in traditional African societies and
other world religions. The focus will be on teachings of
the Bible and Christian churches in general. The course
also examines government policies pertaining to the
preservation of the environment and the activities
of non-government organizations that promote the
promote the environment in Botswana and national
monuments. Things such as, sanitation, air pollution,
deforestation, water pollution, overgrazing, littering, lack
of public toilets in cities and towns are examined.
ALL 452-Popular Culture in Africa
The course will include a study of culture, subcultures
and visual culture with emphasis on music, dance,
films/videos, television, computer and their intertextual relationship. It will also include the element
of everydayness, ideology of mass culture, theories of
consumption and its confrontation with politics, religion
and the spirit of conservatism.

PST 406 Mission and Evangelism
This course examines the theological basis of church
planting and growth focusing on the theology of
Christian missions in Africa. The relationship between the
early Christians and African culture shall be examined.
The course also examines the different strategies used
in evangelism by traditional means as well as the media
and modern technology such as the internet, satellite,
radio, television and the printed word.
PST 407-History and doctrine of Pentecostal Christianity
This course will study the history and theology of
Pentecostal Christianity. It will trace the history of
Pentecostal expressions of Christianity culminating in
the Azusa street Revival. Focus will be on Pentecostal
Christianity in Africa including its expressions in
charismatic groups even within non-Pentecostal
churches. The course will discuss Pentecostal theology
such as the doctrine of “wealth and health.” The
contribution of this form of Christianity both to the
Christian faith and to Botswana and African society in
general, will be analysed.
PST 408-Media and Pastoral Studies
This course examines the role of media in the life and
work of the church. The course emphasizes the role of
modern technology in disseminating the word of God.
It also examines the impact of ethical issues on the
freedom of speech of the media.
TRS 420- Directed research II: Research Project
In this course the student will undertake independent
study under the guidance of a supervisor who will be
responsible for advising and instructing the student in
matters of research methods as well as content.
PST 409-Theology of the African Independent Churches
This course examines the history and theologies of the
African Independent Churches (AICs) in Africa generally
and Botswana in particular. It examines the sources from
which the AICs develop their theologies and critically
evaluates the sources and the developed theologies.
PTS 410- Theologies of Liberation II: African and Feminist
Christian Theologies
This course examines the origin and development of
African Christian Theology and Feminist Theology and
their impact in Africa today. It examines their sources,
methods of theologizing, their main tenets and their
stand in the world-wide theological discourse.
TRS 415 –Twentieth Century Theologians
This course will study several major theologians,
Protestant and Roman Catholics of the twentieth century
and the contributions their thought has made to the
development of contemporary systematic theology. It
will consider such figures as Karl Barth, Rudolf Bultmann,
Paul Tillich, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Jurgen Moltmann, and
Roman Catholic theological thought before and after the
Second Vatican Council, particularly that of Hans Kung,
Karl Rahner and Eduard Schillebeecck. It will also discuss
the relevance of twentieth century Christian theology to
contemporary social, economic, political and religious
issues.
TRS 417 Paul’s Epistles
This course will cover the Pauline and Deutero-Pauline
letters of the New Testament. It will use different
methods to analyse the socio-historical context that
gave rise to Pauline letters.
TRS 419-Intermediate Hebrew II: Hebrew Text and Dead
Sea Scrolls
This course will build on the knowledge of Biblical

Hebrew, grammar and sytax acquired in Beginning
Biblical Hebrew I and II.
Course Code and Title: TRS 425-Theology of the
Reformation
This course will study the religious, social economic and
political factors that let to the Reformation and CounterReformation in the sixteenth century and the attempts
made by the Catholic Church to reform itself from within
and stop the Reformation movement from spreading
world-wide. The course will consider some of the major
theologians and important themes that dominated the
theological thinking of this period.

VISUAL AND PERFORMING
ARTS PROGRAMME
Departmental Regulations

Subject to the provisions of the Academic General
Regulations and the Faculty of Humanities Special
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply:
Programmes and Titles of Degrees
The Visual and Performing Arts Program currently offers
the following courses leading to the award of a Bachelor
of Fine Arts (Theatre Studies) Degree.
Entry Requirements
Admission requirements to the Programmes in the Visual
and Performing Arts Program are specified in the Faculty
of Humanities Regulation 22.2.
Award of Degree
A student must satisfy the appropriate provisions of
General Academic Regulation 20.4 to be awarded a
Degree.
1.1 Programme Structure
1.1.1 The Bachelor of Fine Arts (Theatre Studies) is a
full-time professional programme extending
over eight semesters. The Theatre Studies
programme is a practical skills course that
seeks to develop qualified theatre practitioners.
Currently the programme focuses on four
main areas of specialisation, namely Directing,
Playwriting, Acting, Movement and Mime as
well as Design and Technical Theatre. Students
are introduced to the different specialities
in second and third year, and can then begin
to focus on their areas of interest. Students
may also take optional courses from other
Departments such as Media Studies, English,
Education and Industrial Design to augment
their skills set. In order to graduate students
must complete a minimum of 120 credits
worth of courses, including GEC courses in IT
and Communications (10 credits). A minimum
of 80 credits must be VAPA core and optional
coursesóincluding core courses offered in the
Department of English at level 1 and optional
courses housed under other departmentsówhile
the remaining 40 credits can be electives. Where
students have more than 120 credits, they must
ensure that two thirds (2/3) of their credits are
VAPA core and optional courses, while one third
(1/3) are electives.
BACHELOR OF FINE ARTS COURSES
Level 100
BFA100
Introduction to the Theatre100 Core (3)

159

BFA121
Workshop Theatre I Core (3)
BFA102
Theatre in Botswana I (Origins) Core(3)
BFA122
Workshop Theatre II Core (3)
ENG121
Introduction to English Language 		
Description and Usage (3)
ENG113
Introduction to Literature: Prose (3)
ENG131 Writing in English (3)
ENG123 Introduction to Literature: Drama and
Poetry (3)
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
Semester one
COM111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills I (Humanities) (3)
ICT111
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (3)
Semester two
COM112 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills II (Humanities) (3) CORE
ICT112
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
CORE
Level 200
BFA203
BFA205
BFA206
BFA221
BFA200
BFA202
BFA204
BFA222
Level 300
BFA309
BFA310
BFA312
BFA313
BFA302
BFA303
BFA304
BFA305
BFA306
BFA308
BFA311
BFA314
BFA318
Level 400
BFA400
BFA403
BFA404
BFA405
BFA406
BFA409
BFA410
BFA411
BFA412
BFA415
BFA416
BFA418
BFA427
BFA428

Acting, Movement & Mime I Core (3)
Designs & Technical Theatre I Core (3)
Theatre in Africa I Core (3)
Production Workshop I Core (3)
Theatre History I Core (3)
Theatre in Botswana II Core (3)
Playwriting Core (3)
Production Workshop II Core (3)
Directing I Core (3)
Dramatic Literature I [Africa] Core (3)
Stage Management
Core (3)
Theatre Ethics Core (3)
Theatre in Botswana [Theatre & Mass
Media]Optional (3)
Acting, Movement & Mime II Optional (3)
Playwriting II Optional (3)
Design & Technical Theatre II Optional (3)
Theatre in Africa II Optional (3)
American Theatre Optional (3)
Playback Theatre Optional (3)
Theatre History [Europe] Optional 3
Theatre Attachment Core 3
Theatre History: Asia Optional (3)
Acting, Movement & Mime III Optional (3)
Playwriting III Optional (3)
Design & Technical Theatre IIIOptional (3)
Theatre & Society in Africa
[Special Author] Optional (3)
Advanced Directing Optional (3)
Dramatic literature II [Europe] 		
Optional (3)
Theories of Modern Drama 		
[1920-Present] Optional (3)
Theatre Administration Optional (3)
Drama-in-Education [DIE Optional (3)
Senior Project Core (6 credits)
Theatre & Tourism Optional (3)
Development Theatre I Optional (3)
Development Theatre II Optional (3)

NOTE:
All Practical courses are assessed on a 70%
[practical exam] and 30% [CA] format. The practical
examination is a semester-long/year-long extensive
work on a theatre project that culminates in a
performance.
This course will be assessed on a 60% [ensemble

production] and 40% [CA] format
These are existing courses in the Department of
English
These courses are part of ENG327 [Practical Theatre]
and ENG417 [Theory and Practice of Drama] currently
being offered in the Department of English
All practical courses shall, to a large degree be linked
to workshops, festivals or other community activities
OPTIONAL COURSES FROM OTHER
DEPARTMENTS
ALL142: The Study of Drama in Indigenous 		
Languages 100 Optional 3
Credits
ARB121: Design Communication Optional 3 		
Credits
ARB123: History of Art Optional 3 Credits
COM111 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skill GEC 3
MTK100 Principles of Marketing Optional 3 		
Credits
DSW207 Culture, Change and Social Work in
Botswana Optional 3 Credits
DTB222
Graphics Optional 3 Credits
EPP201
Art Introduction Optional 3 Credits
EPP202
Practical Arts Skills for the Teacher
Optional 3 Credits
GEC200 GEC 2
GEC200 GEC 2
MTK200
ALL343

Integrated Communications Optional 3
Introduction to African Popular Theatre

Optional 3
ALL352
Epic Performance in Africa Optional 3
BMS329 Developmental Communication		
Optional 3
BMS333 Radio Documentary Writing & 		
Production Optional 3
BMS334 TV and Video Documentary Writing &
Production Optional 3
DTB312
Aesthetics Optional 3
EPP302
Practical Skills in Teaching of Art		
Optional 3
GEC300 GEC 2
GEC300 GEC 2
HEE358
Fashion and Society Optional 3
HEE359
Design Fundamentals Optional 3
MKT304 Advertising (Prerequisite: MKT200) 		
Optional 3
POP302
Research Methods Optional 3 Credits
ALL454
Childrenís Traditions and Dramatics
Optional 3
BMS424 Radio Drama Script-writing & Production
Optional 3
GEC400 GEC2
GEC400 GEC 2
HEE457
History and Conservation of Textiles
Optional 3
PHR424 Movement & Creative Dance Technique
Optional 3
NOTE
All optional courses from other Departments are existing
courses.
APPENDIX 1: THEATRE PROGRAMME [ABBREVIATED
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS]
INTRODUCTION TO THE THEATRE
LEVEL 1 [CORE] 3 CREDITS
This course offers a theoretical panoramic coverage of
important theoretical foundations from the ancient

Greek period to the modern period. Course spread
touches on most arms of the arts of Theatre, ranging
from stage movement to costume, scene design and
construction, acting and directing. This course helps to
familiarize students with the traditions, components
and development of Theatre and dramatic arts from the
earliest times to the 21st century.
Outcomes:
Information and communication technology knowledge
and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Entrepreneurship and employability skills; Research
skills and information literacy; Cross-cultural fluency;
Accountability and ethical standards.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
THEATRE IN BOTSWANA LEVEL 1
[CORE] 3 CREDITS
This introductory course offers a composite coverage of
the socio-historical contexts and philosophical bases of
drama, performance and Theatre practices and traditions
in Botswana looking at indigenous performances and
Theatre practices, colonial and postcolonial literary
drama and Theatre in Botswana.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Research skills and information literacy; and Crosscultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
WORKSHOP THEATRE LEVEL 1 [OPTIONAL] 6 CREDITS
An introduction to the paradigm shifts from conventional
to the actor, dancer and musicianís Theatre. The course
is geared towards nurturing the talents of emerging
Theatre practitioners and to focus the studentsí natural
sense of play on the creative process of Theatre. This
course will enable students to understand the concepts
techniques used in the devising plays, and facilitation of
community-Theatre. Students will acquire workshopping
skills in creating independent plays, while providing
them with fresh insights into collaborative and ensemble
playing.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% exam
ACTING, MOVEMENT AND MIME I LEVEL 2
[OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course offers a critical and creative introduction to
acting, movement and mime for the stage. The course,
devoted to the development of the physical instrument
of the actor [the body], will include basic physical, vocal,
imaginative skills, miming skills, and development of

160

general stage movement for the beginning actor.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Crosscultural fluency; Accountability and ethical standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
DESIGN AND TECHNICAL THEATRE I LEVEL 2 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS
An introduction to the techniques involved in costume,
light, set, and sound designing for the Theatre.
Productions currently being presented at the University
will serve as the sources for study.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Entrepreneurship and employability skills;
Organizational and teamwork skills; Research skills and
information literacy; Interpersonal skills; Cross-cultural
fluency.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam.
PLAYWRITING LEVEL 2 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
Principles of playwriting will be taught through practices.
Development of techniques required for dramatic stage
scripts include original writing and adaptations with
emphasis on play construction, character development,
dialogue, and mood.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; skills and information literacy; Crosscultural fluency; Accountability and ethical standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Exam [original one-act play]
PRODUCTION WORKSHOP I LEVEL 2 [OPTIONAL]
6 CREDITS
This intensive workshop course introduces students
to the processes of working with a scripted play and
preparing the play for performance. Students will engage
in text analysis, social research, creative interpretation,
rehearsals and then performance. This is a course for
performers, designers, and directors.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam

THEATRE HISTORY I [1642-1800] LEVEL 2 [OPTIONAL] 3
CREDITS
This is a follow-up on the Theatre History course in Level I.
this course specifically tracks the historical development
of British Theatre and drama from the Middle Ages to
1800, the Spanish Theatre to 1700, and Theatre in France
1500-1700.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and
ethical standards.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
THEATRE IN AFRICA LEVEL 2 [CORE] 3 CREDITS
This course explores the nexus between history, culture
and identity in African performance. The course raises
questions about representation and the production of
theatrical knowledge within and across African cultures.
While play-texts dealing with cultural practices, history,
politics, religion and social problems plaguing the
African continent will be studied, in-depth historical
and sociological studies of indigenous forms of drama in
Africa will also be surveyed.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; Interpersonal skills; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
THEATRE IN BOTSWANA [POPULAR THEATRE] LEVEL 2
[CORE] 3 CREDITS
This course is a continuation of Theatre in Botswana at
Level 1. The course will now take a more detailed look
at popular performances and Theatre-for-Development
in Botswana.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Communication skills; Research skills and information
literacy; Interpersonal skills; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
ACTING, MOVEMENT AND MIME II LEVEL 3 [OPTIONAL] 3
CREDITS: PREREQUISITE: ACTING,
MOVEMENT AND MIME I
A more advanced course on acting, movement, and
mime for the stage. This course continues development
of skills acquired in Acting, Movement and Mime I. Helps
students develop believable characters while working on
acting, movement and mime exercises and duet scenes
from contemporary dramatic literature. This is a course
for actors, dancers and physical performers and as such
will uncover a performerís physical personality and
presence on stage, to prepare work using the body as
an intuitive and symbolizing instrument. Students taking
this course will also explore Physical Theatre forms and
approaches.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology

knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy;
Interpersonal skills; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
AMERICAN THEATRE [20-21st CENTURY] LEVEL 3 [CORE]
3 CREDITS
This course focuses on the development of the American
Theatre from the 20th to the 21st century, paying
attention to the changing conditions of the Theatre in
the United States and other American nations. Topics
include black Theatre, Womenís Theatre, off-Broadway
and Minority Theatre. It examines the plays as theatrical
experiences to such aspects as staging, acting, lighting
and music and the responses of American drama to
changing social and political thought in the Americas.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Entrepreneurship and employability skills; Research skills
and information Interpersonal skills; and Cross-cultural
fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
DESIGN AND TECHNICAL THEATRE II LEVEL 3
[OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course is a follow-up to Design and Technical Theatre
I. in this course the techniques involved in costume, light,
set, and sound designing for the Theatre are taken to
a higher level. Productions currently being presented at
the University will serve as the sources for study.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy;
Interpersonal skills; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
DIRECTING I LEVEL 3 [CORE] 3 CREDITS
This is an introductory practical course in directing
plays and an analysis of skill and role of the director.
The course will explore script analysis, casting, staging,
space, composition, movement, picturization, rhythm
and tempo of actors, and scripts. Special emphasis will
be on directing the one-act play.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam

161

DRAMATIC LITERATURE [AFRICA] LEVEL 3
[OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course focuses on the history and development of
drama in Africa. Dramatic literature refers to the texts of
plays that can be read, as distinct from being seen and
heard in performance. Therefore, drama will be studied
primarily as a literary form but attention will also be
given to placing the drama in the Theatre and cultural
milieu from which it developed. Authors to be studied
will include, for instance, Soyinka, J.P. Clark, Wilde, Shaw,
Aidoo, Fugard etc.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Entrepreneurship and employability skills; Research skills
and information literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Practical exam
PLAY BACK THEATRE LEVEL 3 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course will place Playback Theatre in a literary
and historical context as a modern development of
oral traditional ceremonial ritual. Students will learn
about stories and how they work; about the history
of the approach and its comparison to Theatre of the
oppressed, Theatre for development, and other forms of
interactive Theatre; and about the underlying theories of
respect for persons and positive social change on which
it is based. The basic forms of Playback Theatre will be
taught experientially, and students will practice the roles
of actor, musician, conductor, and teller. Also introduced
will be the group dynamics necessary for successful
encounters with community audiences.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
PLAYWRITING II LEVEL 3 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course continues, at an advanced level, the
playwriting course in Level 2. At this level the techniques
of writing other forms such as Film, Radio and TV scripts
will be added to the course.
Students will be expected to write a short play loosely
based on an existing classic from which they write their
own ñ fresh, relevant and personal - new, full-length
play. The idea behind this approach is two-fold. Firstly, it
gives the writers a sense of complete creative freedom,
along with the security of a failsafe structure. Secondly,
through the deep investigation of a classic work, the
writers absorb an understanding of how all the elements
of drama are effectively employed.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.

Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Exam [original multi-scene play]
STAGE MANAGEMENT LEVEL 3 [CORE] 3 CREDITS
This course deals with the techniques and conventions
commonly in use for staging the production, planning,
rehearsals, coordinating, technical requirements, and
professional standards expected in staging a production.
Outcomes:
Information and communication technology knowledge
and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment		
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
THEATRE ETHICS LEVEL 3 [CORE] 3 CREDITS
This course will examine a series of contemporary
plays and Theatre productions in relation to the ethics
of representation. It will explore the writerís or the
directorís responsibilities in staging the self and the
other in Theatre and the strategies they adopt to
highlight and problematize this process. By combining
theoretical, textual and performance analysis, the course
will engage with debates surrounding, for instance,
alterity, community research, consent, cultural and
autobiographical memory, defamation, intellectual
property rights, representation of violence, sexuality, and
trauma in Theatre. The course will also look at concepts
such as meta-Theatre and the role of the author in the
Theatre text as well as practices that aim to embody
ethical positions in and through performance. Theatre
Ethics will combine the pleasure and excitement of
attending live Theatre, with the challenge of exploring
and discussing the principles that frame moral choice.
Outcomes: Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; Interpersonal skills; Cross-cultural fluency;
Accountability and ethical standards
Mode of Assessment
70% coursework
30% exam
THEATRE HISTORY: EUROPE LEVEL 3 [OPTIONAL] 3
CREDITS
This course surveys the heritage and beginning of modern
European drama, investigating significant movements
and key personalities in Theatre practice from 18751915. This course will provide a theoretical base for the
exploration, as well as providing a conceptual framework
for Theatre research in modern European drama.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework

60% Written exam
THEATRE IN AFRICA II LEVEL 3 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course is an extension of Theatre in Africa I. the
course seeks to imbue students with knowledge of
drama, thematic concerns, and theatrical practices
[performance mode and styles] as they obtain in West
and east Africa from pre-colonial days to the present.
Play-texts which explore African problems from the
colonial period to the present will be studied.
Outcomes:
Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical and creative
thinking skills; Problem-solving skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
THEATRE IN BOTSWANA [THEATRE AND THE MASS
MEDIA] LEVEL 3 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
The focus of this course will be contemporary Theatre
in Botswana, taking particular look at Botswana Theatre
and the mass media - television drama; video drama/
movie.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Entrepreneurship and employability skills; Research skills
and information literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
ACTING, MOVEMENT AND MIME III LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS: PREREQUISITE: ACTING, MOVEMENT AND
MIME II
A much more advanced course on acting, movement, and
mime for the stage. This course continues development
of skills acquired in Acting, Movement and Mime II. Helps
students develop believable characters while working on
acting, movement and mime exercises and duet scenes
from contemporary dramatic literature. The students
offering this course will form the core of actors for
students offering Advanced Directing.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
ADVANCED DIRECTING LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course is an advanced exploration of the directing
process. This course is the principal training forum for
the directing specialization. It is a rigorous practicum
that hones the vision of each student-director. Each
directing student will analyze a play script to uncover
dramatic events, beats, dramatic structure, spine or
through-line, and inciting incident which will culminate
in the performance of a full-length play by each student
offering this course.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-

162

solving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
DESIGN AND TECHNICAL THEATRE III LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS
A study of the technical aspects of Theatre including set,
properties construction, scene designing and painting,
costumes construction, lights and sound design at an
much advanced level. This course will also include script
analysis, the creation of floor plans, elevated drawings
of stage sets, construction of a stage model, lighting
plot, phases of costume design, analysis of characters,
and period research. Students specialize in one of the
following areas: costume/make-up, lighting, or set
design. Each specialization offers students an opportunity
to receive an advanced hands-on training and contribute
to a range of staged theatrical productions.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
DRAMA-IN-EDUCATION LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course introduces Drama-in-Education as a
methodology for learning. It enables communication
between individuals exploring person to person
experiences. Drama brings people in touch with play,
improvisation, group interaction, role play and creative
problem solving. While the Drama-in-Education course
will consist mainly of practical and experiential work,
there will also be an important theoretical aspect
included.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam
DRAMATIC LITERATURE II [EUROPE] LEVEL 4
[OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course is a continuation of the introductory work
done in third year at an advanced level. This course
will entail detailed study of dramatists and play texts.
Among the dramatists to be studied will be Aeschylus,
Sophocles, Euripides, Menander, Seneca, the Wakefield
Master, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, Lope de

Vega, Moliere, Racine, Dryden, and Congreve.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Entrepreneurship and employability skills; Research skills
and information literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Practical exam
PLAYWRITING III LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
In Playwriting III [Advanced playwriting] each student is
expected to produce a full-length play of any style. This
course is for the student who has developed experience
in creating a narrative presentation, this course will
further the study of the dramatic structure of short and
full length plays, screenplays, and teleplays. This course
focuses on the writing of an original full-length play.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Exam [original multi-scene play]
SENIOR PROJECT LEVEL 4 [CORE] 6 CREDITS
In this course each student majoring in Theatre will write
a proposal on any chosen topic on any of the major
areas of Theatre. After writing the proposal students can
then either choose to carry out a practical project on the
topic, or complete a full-length essay on the topic.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; Social responsibility and leadership
skills; Interpersonal skills; Cross-cultural fluency;
Accountability and ethical standards.
Mode of Assessment
100% coursework
THEATRE ADMINISTRATION LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL] 3
CREDITS
This course is designed to study the tools of Theatre
management and producing, box office, price and
percentages, publicity, pro-motion, and production
costs, and dealing with publishers and agencies. Regional
Theatre problems are analyzed. This course will, therefore,
focus on the business of Theatre, administration,
budgeting, feasibility studies, funding, publicity/
promotion, master scheduling, and event handling.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
30% coursework
70% Practical exam

THEATRE AND SOCIETY IN AFRICA [SPECIAL AUTHOR]
LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
This course provides the students the opportunity of
studying in depth the work of a particular African author.
The author, content bibliography and mode of teaching
this course will be determined from time to time as
circumstances allow. The study of such an author affords
the students the opportunity of also surveying the role
of African Theatre and playwrights in their engagement
with the nagging problems of the environment and
cultural super-structures, including econo-political
conditions in African societies. This course responds to
the growing awareness of the contributions, and impact
of Theatre on African societies and arms students with
the tools of theatrical/dramatic criticism of society.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
THEATRE AND TOURISM LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS
This course will focus on the role of Theatre in promoting
tourism in Botswana by exploring ways of matching
touristsí actual experiences of the destination with
the image and expectations created by the Theatre.
This course will also explore not only issues of basic
satisfaction, but also of authenticity, changes in culture,
heritage interpretation, and presentation. This course
will involve the students working with communities to
produce plays or devising plays for communities.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards. Mode of Assessment 60% coursework 40%
Practical exam
THEATRE ATTACHMENT LEVEL 3 [CORE] 3 CREDITS
A one month internship in a Theatre company during
which the student observes and becomes familiar with
Theatre organization and participates in work practices.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
100% coursework
DEVELOPMENT THEATRE I LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS
This course introduces students to the concept of Theatre
as an instrument of conscientization and empowerment
for the socially deprived communities. In this course,
Theatre will be approached an agent of integrated rural
development used as a method for non-formal adult

163

education in rural and marginalized areas. The course
will enable students to perceive the relationship between
popular Theatre and non-formal education as it will
be anchored on the grassroots approach to education
and development. The course will also train students to
become catalysts and participants in rural development.
Outcomes: Information and communication technology
knowledge and skills; Self-directed, lifelong learning
skills; Critical and creative thinking skills; Problemsolving skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship
and employability skills; Organizational and teamwork
skills; Research skills and information literacy; Social
responsibility and leadership skills; Interpersonal skills;
Cross-cultural fluency; Accountability and ethical
standards.
Mode of Assessment
100% coursework
DEVELOPMENT THEATRE II LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS
The course is aimed at applying the theories and skills
of Theatre for Development acquired in Development
Theatre I. Students in group of 3-4, find a development
partner such as a Non-Government or Community
Organisation with which it develops a strategy for using
theatre as a method of developmental communication.
The students create a project proposal and apply it
through research, devising of a play, performance and
evaluation.
Mode of Assessment
50% coursework
50% practical examination
THEATRE HISTORY: ASIA LEVEL 4 [OPTIONAL]
3 CREDITS
This course will explore the history and origins of
the major forms of Asian Theatre, performance and
production style and practices of both the traditional
Asian Theatre and the contemporary theatrical trends
and influences with the objective of exposing students
to, and broadening their appreciation of, the theatrical
arts of Asia. This course will also identify the similarities
and the differences between the various Asian theatrical
forms, and explore the influences of western style
Theatre on Asian theatrical practices, and the significant
influences of Asian Theatre on the west.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills;
Critical and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving
skills; Communication skills; Entrepreneurship and
employability skills; Research skills and information
literacy; Social responsibility and leadership skills;
Interpersonal skills; and Cross-cultural fluency.
Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Practical exam
THEORIES OF MODERN DRAMA [1920-PRESENT] LEVEL 4
[OPTIONAL] 3 CREDITS
The course involves the study of the major modern
theories and developments that have shaped the
Twentieth Century Theatre from 1920 to the present.
Students will be trained to become familiar with modern
and experimental developments of Theatre and drama.
Outcomes: Self-directed, lifelong learning skills; Critical
and creative thinking skills; Problem-solving skills;
Entrepreneurship and employability skills; Research skills
and information literacy; and Cross-cultural fluency.

Mode of Assessment
40% coursework
60% Written exam
Career opportunities Bachelor of fine Arts (Theatre).
1.
Acting for stage radio or video
2.
Advertising
3.
Communication industries
4.
Community Cultural Development Indus
tries
5.
Correctional Facilities
6.
Dance Industries
7.
Design Industries
8.
Education (formal & informal)
9.
Entertainment Industries
10. Film Industries
11. Mass media Industries
12. Public Relations firms
13. Research (especially action research)
14. Script-writing
15. Theatre Industries
16. Tourism Industries

164

165

FACULTY OF MEDICINE

DEAN
Prof. O. NKOMAZANA,
,)MBChB (Glasgow
,)FCOphth (RSA), MScCEH (LSHTM
)PhD (Stellenbosch
DEPUTY DEAN
)RESEARCH AND GRADUATE STUDIES(
Prof. D. RAMOGOLA- MASIRE,
BMedSci (Uni of Nottingham), BMBS
,)Uni of Nottingham) FCOG, (RSA(
)MSC-Public Health ( Uni of London

ACTING DEPUTY DEAN

ANAESTHESIA & CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS(

BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES

,Dr J. MASUNGE

EMERGENCY MEDICINE

)MB ChB, DCH, FCPaed (RSA

FAMILY MEDICINE & PUBLIC HEALTH MEDICINE
INTERNAL MEDICINE

HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER

MEDICAL EDUCATION
OBSTETRICS AND GYNAECOLOGY

)Mr. N.A. Nkanga (BA, MLIS (UB) MSc HRM (Cardiff

PAEDIATRICS & ADOLESCENT HEALTH
PATHOLOGY
PSYCHIATRY
RADIOLOGY
SURGERY

166

DEPARTMENTS
1. Anaesthesia & Critical Care Medicine
2. Biomedical Sciences
3. Emergency Medicine
4. Family Medicine & Public Health Medicine
5. Internal Medicine
6. Medical Education
7. Obstetrics and Gynaecology
8. Paediatrics & Adolescent Health
9. Anatomical Pathology
10. Psychiatry
11. Radiology
12. Surgery
Entry Requirements to the Bachelor of Medicine Bachelor
of Surgery (MBBS) Programme
There is no direct entry into the Bachelor of Medicine
Bachelor of Surgery programme at Faculty of Medicine.
The only opportunity for an applicant to be considered
directly is when they have attained Advanced levels
(A-levels), BSc year 1 or equivalent, be it in Botswana
or abroad.
Admission to the Faculty of Medicine.
The University of Botswana selects students to enter the
medical degree programme in August: the process takes
place over May, June and July. Students seeking admission
must apply immediately when the announcement is
made. These students will be selected on the basis of
their year one results in BSc, A-level results or equivalent,
followed by assessment of their application form
and interviews. Personal and professional behaviours,
academic performance and communication skills will be
considered in the process. Successful candidates will be
immediately enrolled in the Faculty of Medicine MBBS
programme to begin the Phase I, problem based learning
(PBL) curriculum.
Undergraduate Degree Programme
The undergraduate programme is five years in length and
divided into two parts. Part One (Phase I of the MBBS
programme) consists of 2 years in a fully integrated
curriculum of basic medical sciences within clinical PBL
cases and clinical skills teaching with regular clinical
attachments. A 7 week Winter Semester has been added
to allow for the greater intensity of medical education
and Public Health training. The teaching methodology
is based on body systems and includes plenary lectures,
PBL within small groups, workshops, with laboratories
and clinical skills for practical learning. The curriculum is
intended to have a strong focus on the community. It is
flexible to meet the needs of both faculty and students,
and responds to changing health care demands of the
country. Design of the PBL content reflects the health
problems and resources of the community. Online
learning is becoming a major teaching/learning strategy.
The second part, or the three subsequent Phase II years,
requires hospital and clinic rotations in the major
disciplines. These experiences are enhanced with an
opportunity to explore community services and public
health efforts. Phase II of the programme consists of
Years 3-5. The students are exposed to learning in a
clinical context that eventually enables them to acquire
the competencies for independent practice as graduates
of medicine at the end of their medical internship
programme. Acquiring most competencies in the clinical
years is progressive throughout the undergraduate life.
Therefore, the complete Phase II competencies can only
be fully assessed at the end of Year 5. This assessment is
done in each of the 5 courses of that year and also in a
case-based fully integrated examination at the end of
the year.

• Absence and illness
The learning framework in Year 5 largely consists of
contact with a wide variety of patients through an
“assistant intern scheme”. The PBL process continues
but the emphasis changes to consider broader issues
of patient management, so can properly be called casebased learning. Apart from the PBL sessions (which
should as much as possible be on real patients), the
tutor’s role should concentrate on observation of and
feedback on the student-patient encounter, rather than
on transfer of factual information which the students
can find out for themselves with appropriate guidance.
Students must keep a record of skills they have acquired
which has to be signed off by a senior member of staff.
Special Regulations of the Faculty of Medicine for the
MBBS Programme
The important requirements to note for students reading
for Bachelor of Medicine Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) are:
1. Students need to meet minimum academic standards
determined for each course/module to sit for the
final examination for Phase I. Students need to pass
Continuous Assessment (CA) to be allowed to sit for the
Final Examination in Phase II.
2. Students are required to score 50% and above in the
Final Examination to pass a course.
ASSESSMENT AND ACADEMIC PROGRESSION
REGULATIONS
1.0 Regulations Guiding Assessments in Phase I of the
MBBS Programme
1.1 Senate’s General Academic Regulations
• The Senate’s General Academic Regulations of the
University of Botswana (modified where necessary
to accommodate the peculiarities of assessment in
medical education), shall apply to all assessments in
Phase I.
• All assessments in the Phase I of the MBBS programme
shall be blueprinted to the three core themes of the
programme:
- Medical and related science
- Doctor-patient relationship
- Public Health Medicine
1.2 Academic Year
• The academic year in both years shall comprise 35
teaching weeks, a one week of reading (revision) and
three weeks to prepare for and undergo for a final
integrated theory and practical examination.
• There shall be no semester courses in Phase I – courses
vary from 2-6 weeks in duration. The SOM courses
in both years are assessed at the end of each course
(called ‘blocks’ in Phase I and ‘rotations’ in Phase
II). However academic standing is determined and
progression decisions are made at the end of each
academic year.
1.3 Attendance
• Attendance of all contact sessions (PBL, clinical skills
sessions, community and clinic placements, practical
sessions, workshops and seminars) in all courses in
Phase I is compulsory. Students are expected to have
100% attendance during these contact sessions in
each course. Students who have attended less than
80% of the contact periods in any course (without
valid reasons) will not be allowed to participate in
the end-of-semester or end-of year examination in
that course and shall be awarded a zero mark in that
particular examination.

167

- Students requiring leave of absence for any reason
should seek permission in advance from the Phase I
coordinator and should notify relevant tutors and
their PBL facilitator. Students who have to be absent
unexpectedly for an urgent reason should notify
the Phase I coordinator who will offer any help s/he
can, and will inform relevant tutors of the student’s
absence.
- Students who are ill and whose illness causes them to
miss a required session, an examination, a summative
assessment, or a submission date must inform the
Phase I coordinator or their PBL facilitator and
provide a doctor’s certificate as soon as possible. If
their absence is prolonged (more than 1 week), if they
are repeatedly absent, or if their illness causes them to
request a suspension of their studies they should ask
their doctor to provide more detailed information to
the Phase I coordinator.
• If a student is unable to meet the required minimum
of 80% attendance of contact sessions in any course
due to exceptional or extenuating circumstances, the
candidate may be admitted in the end-of-course and
end-of-year examination provided that the Dean had
been notified in writing (with copies to the Phase I
coordinator and Head(s) of Department concerned)
within 48 hours of the event. Such a letter should
describe the nature of the circumstance. In all cases
the department(s) concerned should advise on the
preparedness of the candidate to sit for the exam or
be considered for a special examination.
• If a student has met all the requirements in any course,
but is unable to sit for the end-of-course or end-ofyear examination due exceptional or extenuating
circumstance (bereavement, ill health or other
circumstances that may cause emotional trauma), for
which the Dean has been duly notified, the candidate
can apply to be considered for a special end-of-course
or end-of-year examination. The special examination
must take place before the beginning of the next
academic year but not earlier than 48 hours after the
student is certified fit to sit for the examination.
• Once a student has sat for the end-of-course or endof-year examination, he or she may not afterwards
apply for a special examination on the basis of
unforeseen circumstances.
1.4 Progression from Year to Year
Progression through the Programme is dependent on a
student demonstrating the following:
• Suitable engagement with and application to the
Programme, usually measured by attendance at
classes and involvement in coursework.
• Sufficient progress in academic work and acquiring of
skills, usually measured by summative assessments
To pass to the next stage of a student must:
• Obtain at least 50% overall for each course and pass all
courses in each stage
• Fulfil the attendance and performance requirements
within the Programme, including attendance at all
PBL, clinical skills and clinical placement and practical
sessions. Attendance and engagement at all these
sessions will be recorded.
1.5 Minimum Standardization Requirements (Standard
Setting)
• According to the Faculty of Medicine Regulations on

assessment, both internal and external moderation of
assessment tasks shall occur.
• All written examination questions shall be internally
moderated by a panel of examiners selected from the
relevant disciplines. This panel will carry out a preassessment moderation of all the questions not later
than 6 weeks before the date of the examination. In
the case of the end-of-year integrated examination, all
internally moderated questions must also be externally
moderated by an external examiner appointed
by the Dean, FOM on behalf of Senate, following
departmental recommendation and endorsement
of the Faculty Board. The HOD (Biomedical Sciences)
must ensure that the internally moderated questions
are sent to their appointed external moderators not
later than 4 weeks before the commencement of the
examination. Such an external examiner shall serve for
three consecutive years and shall not be re-appointed.
The function of the external examiner shall be limited
to the moderation of questions in the end-of year
integrated examinations in Phase I.
• After each end-of-course or end-of-year examination
has been marked the pass mark is calculated using
the modified Cohen method or similar and individual
student marks adjusted accordingly.
1.6.0 Assessment
1.6.1 Continuous Assessment for non-Public Health
Medicine Courses
Assessment of students’ progress shall be on a
continuous basis. Formative assessment shall take place
formally as well as informally throughout each course.
Continuous assessment shall carry 40% of the year mark
in each course. The following shall form the components
of continuous assessment in each course:
• PBL assessment: this is made up of an assessment of
each student’s performance in PBL sessions as judged
by the facilitator
• Biopractical/workshop/seminar write-ups or oral
presentations
• Other forms of work suitable for assessment.
Final continuous assessment marks must be ready and
be forwarded to the Phase I coordinator not later than
14 calendar days after the course. The Board shall
consider and formally issue progress reports on each
student during the following meeting of the Board
after each course.
The format of continuous assessment shall be the same
for all the non-Public Health Medicine courses in Phase I.
1.6.2 End-of-Course Examinations for non-Public Health
Medicine Courses
• For each course in both year of Phase I assessments
take place in the form of a written examination taking
place in the last week of the course, which shall carry
60% of the year mark.
• The examination will consist of MCQs, EMIs and short
answer questions. The examinations will normally be
two hours long but could be longer or shorter for
courses of non-standard length.
1.6.3 ‘Integrated Medical Science’ Courses (SOM 209 and
SOM 310)
At the beginning of the Winter Semester in each year in
Phase I a course with this name will be presented. Each
will be three weeks long, providing a one week revision
period and a two week examination period. These courses
will take place after all system based courses have been
completed but before the community attachment
courses are taken. Students will be required to pass these

courses in each year in order to proceed to the next year
of the programme. The assessment of these courses will
contain no continuing assessment (CA) component, but
3 exams in the following format:
• An objective structured clinical exam (OSCE) providing
20% of the final mark for the course. This exam
assesses basic communication and physical skills
using patients (normal/simulated), biostatistics,
epidemiology and data and information search.
• An Anatomy/Histology spot test or practical exam also
providing 20%.
• A minimum of a single Integrated Medical Science
written exam: an integrated exam based on cases. This
examination will contain material from all courses and
all programme themes. It will contain several types of
question format: multiple choice, extended matching,
and very short answer questions. The written
examinations will provide 60% of the final mark for
the course. Given the amount of information learnt
during the year, it is likely that more than 1 integrated
medical science exam will be written, however there
will be 1 mark for this exam.
A student must attain/achieve a minimum mark of 50%
in each component to pass these courses. There shall
be no compensation of marks from one component to
the other. All examination questions in all the courses
shall be externally moderated by external examiners
appointed by the Senate of the University of Botswana.
1.6.4 Assessment for Public Health Medicine Courses
(SOM 208 and SOM 308)
In the Public Health Medicine courses there is no
continuous assessment mark. A final course mark is
allocated at the end of the course from the following
components: a written group project report; a group
project presentation; a group poster presentation;
individual performance in an online Ethics course; a
personal reflection; and an individual attendance and
participation mark.
• Each component of the examination must be passed
in all courses. There shall be no compensation of marks
from one component to the other.
1.7.0 Re-assessment Opportunity
The following regulations shall apply to students who fail
to obtain pass marks at the first assessment opportunity:

MBBS programme. A student who is discontinued
from the MBBS programme shall not be eligible for
re-admission into the programme. Such a student
may apply to another programme for which the
student qualifies.
1.7.4 A student who fails 50% to 60% or more of the year
attempted credits, shall repeat the year of study.
Such a student must repeat all the courses for
the year and meet all the requirements including
continuous assessment and final examination for
all courses for the repeat year. Any student who
fails to obtain a pass mark at the end of the repeat
year shall be treated as in (1.7.3) above.
1.7.5 Notwithstanding the forgoing Faculty of Medicine
special regulations on assessment in Phase I of
the MBBS programme, Senate has the power to
overrule any of the regulations. In such cases, the
Senate General regulations on assessment shall
supersede the provisions of any or all sections of
the regulations set forth in this document.
2.0 Regulations Guiding Assessments in Phase II of the
MBBS Programme
2.1 Senate’s General Academic Regulations
• The Senate’s General Academic regulations of the
University of Botswana (modified where necessary
to accommodate the peculiarities of assessment in
medical education), shall apply to all assessments in
Phase II.
• All assessments in the Phase II of MBBS programme
shall be blueprinted to the three core themes of the
programme:
- Medical and related science
- Doctor-patient relationship
- Public Health Medicine
2.2 Academic Year
• The academic year shall comprise 40 teaching weeks,
a one week of reading (revision) and two weeks of
examination.
• All courses in Phase II shall be yearlong courses and
progression decisions shall only be made at the end
of the year. There shall be no semester courses and
academic standing is determined at the end of the
academic year.

1.7.1 A student who fails to obtain a pass mark in up
to 40% of attempted year credits in a year, shall
apply for supplementary examination in the failed
courses. The mark for the reassessed courses shall
be recorded as the minimum required for the
student to pass if the student scores higher than
this. However, if a student obtains a lower mark
after being reassessed, the initial mark obtained in
the end-of-year examination shall be recorded as
the final mark. The continuous assessment marks
for any student supplementing a course shall count
in the final computation of the year mark.

2.3 Attendance
• Attendance of all contact sessions (clinical ward work,
PBL, whole class lectures, community placements,
tutorials and others as may be determined by the
department) in all courses in Phase II is compulsory.
Students are expected to have 100% attendance
during their clinical work and community programmes.
Students who have attended less than 80% of the
contact periods in any course (without valid reasons)
will not be allowed to participate in the end-of-year
examination in that course and shall be awarded zero
mark in that particular examination. They will have to
repeat the clinical rotation period in that course and
meet up the minimum 80% attendance before being
assessed.

1.7.2 A student who supplements a course and fails to
obtain a pass mark shall repeat the year of study.
Such a student must repeat all the courses for that
year and meet all requirements for that year before
being admitted to the ‘Integrated Medical Science’
course and examination.
1.7.3 A student who fails to obtain a pass mark at the
end of a repeat year shall be discontinued from the

• If a student is unable to meet the required minimum of
80% attendance of contact sessions in any course(s)
due to exceptional or extenuating circumstances,
the candidate may be admitted in the end-of-year
assessment provided that the Dean had been notified
in writing (with copies to the Phase II coordinator
and Head of Department concerned) within 48 hours
of the event. Such letter should describe the nature

168

of the circumstance. In all cases, the department
concerned should advise on the preparedness of the
candidate to sit for the exam or be considered for a
special examination.
• If a student has made all the requirements in any
course(s), but is unable to sit for the end-ofyear examination due exceptional or extenuating
circumstance (bereavement, ill health or other
circumstances that may cause emotional trauma) for
which the Dean has been duly notified, the candidate
can apply to be considered for a special end-of-year
examination. The special examination must take place
before the beginning of the next academic year but
not earlier than 48 hours after the student is certified
fit to sit for the examination.
• Once a student has sat for the end-of-year
examination, he or she may not afterwards apply
for a special examination on the basis of unforeseen
circumstances.
2.4 Progression from Year to Year
A student must pass all the components of the assessment
(written, clinical etc.) and meet all the requirements for
that year in all courses before progressing to the next
year of study. There shall be no carry over. The pass mark
shall be 50%. All high stakes examinations shall undergo
minimum standardization before being administered, or
during the examination in case of the clinical component.
2.5 Minimum Standardization Requirements (Standard
Setting)
• According to the Faculty of Medicine Regulations on
assessment, both internal and external moderation of
assessment tasks shall occur.
• All written examination questions shall be internally
moderated by a panel of examiners selected from the
clinical specialties. This panel will carry out a preassessment moderation of all the questions not later
than 6 weeks before the date of the examination.
All internally moderated questions must also be
externally moderated by an external examiner (in
each course) appointed by the Dean, FOM on behalf
of Senate, following departmental recommendation
and endorsement of the Faculty Board. All HODs must
ensure that their internally moderated questions
are sent to their appointed external moderators not
later than 4 weeks before the commencement of
the examination. Such an external examiner shall
serve for three consecutive years and shall not be reappointed. The function of the external examiner shall
be limited to the moderation of questions in all high
stakes examination in Year 3. In Years 4 and 5 however
the external examiner shall moderate the questions
and be invited to examine in the clinical component
of the examination.
• After each end-of-year examination has been marked
the pass mark is calculated using the modified Cohen
method and individual student marks adjusted
accordingly.
2.6.0 Assessment
2.6.1 Continuous Assessment (CA) in Clinical Courses
Assessment of students’ progress in all three years
of Phase II shall be on a continuous basis. Formative
assessment shall take place informally all through
the clinical rotation period in all the courses. Clinical
instructors are expected to monitor each student’s
performance in their courses through various methods
such as case presentations, PBL sessions, workplacebased assessment etc. and promptly give feedback to the
students on their level of performance. The continuous

assessment shall carry 40% of the year mark in each
course (other than SOM 606 ‘Integrated Clinical Practice’
which carries no CA mark). The following shall form the
components to be assessed using the logbook:
• Clerking and presentation of patients: Each student in
the firm must clerk and present a minimum of one
case per week (assigned by the clinical instructor(s).
This shall carry 10% of the continuous assessment
mark.
• Workplace-based assessment: this shall consist
of mini-clinical examinations (mini-CEXs), direct
observation of practical skills (DOPS) etc. Each student
must complete the number of procedures outlined
in the department’s logbook. The procedures shall be
categorized into those observed (O), assisted in (A)
or performed (P) by the student. This must be dated
and signed by the supervising clinician. Students are
expected to carry out 100% of the listed procedures to
be logged in as determined by the department before
they can sit for the examination. This shall carry 10%
of the continuous assessment mark.
• Formulation of management plan and evidencebased decision making: This shall follow the student’s
patient presentations and will involve requisition of
laboratory or imaging procedures to aid the diagnosis/
management and interpretation of the same by the
student etc. In all cases, the student is expected to
follow-up the patient until discharge or demise of the
patient. In the latter case, if an autopsy is requested
the student must attend the autopsy session and
write down the findings as part of the documentation
of the patient’s illness. This shall carry 10% of the
continuous assessment mark.
• Engagement with the PBL process: All students are to
be assessed during their PBL session for attendance,
contribution and reflective ability on each case. This
shall carry 10% of the continuous assessment mark.
2.6.2 Continuous Assessment (CA) in the Public Health
Medicine Course in Year 4
The continuous assessment in Public Health Medicine
will consist of student presentations on the field activity
(10%), personal reflection (10%) and report on the
community project (20%).
2.6.3 Management of Continuing Assessment (CA) marks
• All continuous assessment (CA) marks must be ready
and be forwarded to the Phase II coordinator not later
than one week after the course. The Departmental
Board shall consider and formally issue progress
reports on each student during the following monthly
meeting of the Board after each rotation.
• A student is expected to have a minimum mark of
(50%) in the continuous assessment (20 marks out
of 40) to be in academic good standing. Any student
who fails the continuous assessment shall not be
admitted to the end-of-year examination. The format
of continuous assessment shall be the same for all the
clinical years.
2.6.4 End-of-Year Examinations in Clinical Courses
There shall be an end-of-year examination which shall
carry 60% of the year mark. Progression decisions
on each student shall only be made at the end of the
year. There shall be written and clinical components
of the examination in all the core clinical specialties
except in Year 3 in which the end-of-year examination
shall consist of two written papers. There shall be no

169

structured oral (viva voce) examination.
2.6.4(i) Year 3 Examinations
In Year 3, the end-of-year examination shall consist of
the following components:
Written Examination
• It shall be administered in each course as follows:
a. Knowledge and understanding paper: comprising
MCQs and extended matching items (EMIs) worth 90
marks (1 hour 30 mins) in each course.
b. Key clinical features: short answer questions (SAQs)
around clinical presentations worth 90 marks (1 hour
30 mins)
• Each component of the examination must be passed.
There shall be no compensation of marks from one
component to the other. All examination questions
in all the courses shall be externally moderated by
external examiners appointed by the Senate of the
University of Botswana.
2.6.4(ii) Year 4 Examinations
In Year 4, the following shall form the components of
the examination:
A. For clinical courses
Written Examination
There shall be one written paper principally assessing
understanding and application, comprising MCQs EMIs
and SAQs worth 120 marks (2 hours) in each course.
This shall carry 20% of the year mark. All examination
questions shall be externally moderated by external
examiners appointed by the Senate of the University of
Botswana.
Clinical Examination
• This shall normally be in the form of objective
structured clinical examination (OSCE).
• There shall be a minimum (16 OSCE stations in all)
for this part of the examination. The time allocation
to each station must be equal and it will range from
a minimum of 10 minutes to a maximum of 15
minutes per station. This shall carry 40% of the year
mark. OSCE stations assessing communication skills
and professionalism must be included. All clinical
examination shall be externally moderated by the
external examiners appointed by the Senate of the
University of Botswana. There shall be one external
examiner for each course.
B. For the Elective and Research Course (Rotation)
There will be no CA mark for this course. It shall be
graded as pass or fail, in each of its two components:
• At the end of the 8 week elective course, students are
required to submit an individual 1500 word scientific
report on the project and/or what they studied during
the elective period under the guidance of a designated
supervisor(s).
• At the end of the first 4 courses of the year (i.e. before
the 6 week Elective rotation commences) students are
required to submit a 3000 word report on the research
project they have undertaken in small groups and
under supervision throughout the year.
It is a requirement to pass both components of the
Elective and Research course before graduation. A formal
report from the students’ supervisors shall be submitted
to the School of Medicine.

2.6.4(iii) Year 5 Examinations
In Year 5, the following shall form the components of
the examination:
A. For each clinical course
In each course there shall be one written paper
principally assessing application, comprising MCQs
EMIs and SAQs worth 120 marks (2 hours). This shall
carry 60% of the year mark and will be administered at
the end of the year. All examination questions shall be
externally moderated by external examiners appointed
by the Senate of the University of Botswana. Students
who fail to pass their CAs may not be admitted to the
end-of-year examination.
B. For the Integrated Clinical Practice Course
This assessment shall not contain a continuous
assessment (CA) component and shall consist of:
• Two fully integrated written papers. By ‘fully
integrated’ is meant that the papers will be structured
around common clinical cases. Each of these ‘cases’
will contain questions related to the aetiology,
presentation, diagnosis, management and/or
prevention of the condition concerned, drawn from a
variety of relevant clinical and biomedical disciplines
(including Pharmacology) as well as Public Health
Medicine, Ethics, Forensic Medicine and Toxicology.
Together they will contribute 50% to the final mark
for the course.
• Two integrated OSCEs in the same format as described
above. There shall be up to 16 OSCE stations altogether
for this component of the examination (8 in each
OSCE). Each shall be for a minimum of 10 minutes
and a maximum of 15 minutes. Each station must be
of the same time allocation. OSCE stations assessing
ethics, communication skills and professionalism must
be included. Together they will contribute 50% to the
final mark for the course.
All exams will be blueprinted according to given learning
outcomes. All written and clinical examinations shall
be externally moderated by the external examiners
appointed by the Senate of the University of Botswana.
There shall be one external examiner for this course. The
written papers will be standard set using the modified
Cohen method. Both the written exams and the OSCEs
have to be passed to pass the course. There shall be
no compensation of marks from one to the other. This
rotation has to be passed to pass the year. The usual
regulations for supplementary examinations will be
applied.
2.7.0 Re-assessment Opportunity
2.7.1 Supplementary Examination
Subject to the Senate General regulations on assessment
(section 00.95), and the Faculty of Medicine Special
Regulations on assessment in the MBBS programme,
supplementary examination shall be held within six (6)
weeks after the end-of-year examination result has
been published and in any case, not later than the 3rd
week of July. The 6 weeks’ time shall be a remediation
period for the students who qualify for supplementary
examination at the end-of-year examinations in Years
3, 4 and 5 – so too for the Integrated Clinical Practice
course examination. Reassessment is only available for
up to two failed courses.
The following regulations shall apply to students who fail
to obtain pass marks at the first assessment opportunity:

2.7.2 A student who fails to obtain a pass mark in up
to two courses (40% of attempted year credits),
shall apply for supplementary examination in the
failed courses. The mark for the reassessed courses
shall be recorded as the minimum required for the
student to pass if the student scores higher than
this. However, if a student obtains a lower mark
after being reassessed, the initial mark obtained
in the end-of-year examination shall be recorded
as the final mark. The course marks (CA) for any
student supplementing a course shall count in
the final computation of the year mark, in courses
where CA marks are used to compute a final mark.
2.7.3 A student who supplements a course and fails to
obtain a pass mark shall repeat the year of study.
Such a student must repeat all the courses for that
year and meet all requirements for that year before
being admitted to the end-of-year examination.
2.7.4 A student who fails to obtain a pass mark at the
end of a repeat year shall be discontinued from the
MBBS programme. A student who is discontinued
from the MBBS programme shall not be eligible for
re-admission into the programme. Such a student
may apply to another programme for which the
student qualifies.
2.7.5 A student who fails up to 3 or more courses in
the year (up to 50% or more of the year attempted
credits), shall repeat the year of study. Such a
student must repeat all the courses for the year and
meet all the requirements including continuous
assessment before being admitted to the end of
the repeat year examination. Any student who fails
to obtain a pass mark at the end of the repeat year
shall be treated as in 2.7.4 above.
2.7.6 Any student who repeats the final year and fails to
obtain a pass mark shall be discontinued from the
MBBS programme as in 2.7.4 above.
2.7.7 Notwithstanding the forgoing Faculty of Medicine
special regulations on assessment in Phase II of
the MBBS programme, Senate has the power to
overrule any of the regulations. In such cases, the
Senate General regulations on assessment shall
supersede the provisions of any or all sections of
the regulations set forth in this document.
2.8 Medical Internship Programme
Following graduation of their medical training with UB,
doctors are expected to complete an internship before
being registered by the Botswana Health Professions
Council (BHPC) as independent practitioners.
PHASE I PROGRAMME (TWO YEARS)
Semester 1
SOM201 Foundations of Medicine (5)
SOM202 Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems (5)
SOM203 Gastrointestinal and Urinary systems (6)
SOM205 Blood and Immune system (4)

Semester 3
SOM301 Skin Pathology, Atherosclerosis and Cancer
(5, pre-requisites SOM 201-SOM 208)
SOM302 Infections; Viral, Bacterial and Parasitic
Disease (6, pre-requisites SOM 201-SOM
208)
SOM303 Pregnancy, Birth and Child Health (5, prerequisites SOM 201-SOM 208)
SOM305 Cardiovascular and Respiratory System II (5,
pre-requisites SOM 201-SOM 208)
Semester 4
SOM304 Urinary System II (2, pre-requisites 		
SOM201-SOM208)
SOM306 Muscular Skeletal System II
(5, pre-requisites SOM201-SOM208)
SOM307 Nervous System and Special Senses II (3,
pre-requisites SOM201-SOM208)
SOM309 Gastrointestinal Diseases (5, pre-requisites
SOM201-SOM208)
Second Winter Semester
SOM209 Integrated Medical Sciences II (3)
SOM308 Community Attachment, Public Health
Project II (3, pre-requisites SOM 201-SOM
208)
PHASE II PROGRAMME – THREE YEARS
Year Three
SOM402 Internal Medicine I (General) (8, 		
prerequisites MBBS year 2 courses SOM
301-SOM 309)
SOM404 Family Medicine I (8, pre-requisites MBBS
year 2 courses SOM 301-SOM 309)
SOM405 Surgery I (General, Anaesthesiology) (8, prerequisites MBBS year 2 courses SOM 301SOM 309)
SOM406 Obstetrics & Gynaecology I (8, prerequisites
MBBS year 2 courses SOM 301-SOM 309)
SOM407 Paediatrics & Adolescent Health I (8,
prerequisites MBBS year 2 courses SOM
301-SOM 309)
Year Four
SOM502 Internal Medicine II: General Internal
Medicine, Infectious Diseases, Dermatology
(8, pre-requisites SOM 402- SOM 407)
SOM503 Electives and Research: Special Project (8,
pre-requisites SOM 502, SOM 504, SOM 505,
SOM 507)
SOM504 Psychiatry (8, pre-requisites SOM 402- SOM
407)
SOM 505 Public Health Medicine (8, pre-requisites
SOM 402- SOM 407)
SOM507 Surgery II: Orthopaedics, Ophthalmology,
Otorhinolaryngology (8, pre-requisites SOM
402- SOM407)
Year Five
SOM602
SOM603

Semester 2
SOM204 Growth, Reproduction and Endocrine
system (6)
SOM206 Muscular Skeletal, Nervous System and
Special Senses (6)
SOM207 Psychological Health (5)
First Winter Semester
SOM209 Integrated Medical Sciences I (3)
SOM208 Community Attachment – Public Health (3)

170

SOM604
SOM605
SOM613
SOM606

Internal Medicine III (General) (8, 		
prerequisites SOM 502-SOM 507)
Obstetrics & Gynaecology II (8, pre-		
requisites SOM 502-SOM 507)
Paediatrics & Adolescent Health II, (8, prerequisites SOM 502-SOM 507)
Family Medicine II (8, pre-requisites SOM
502-SOM 507)
Surgery III: General, Anaesthesiology,
Emergency Medicine (8, pre-requisites SOM
502-SOM 507)
Integrated Clinical Practice (2, pre-requisites
all SOM courses in Phase II)

171

FACULTY OF SCIENCES

DEAN
Prof. I. Masesane
)BSc, MSc (UB
)PhD (Durham
FRSC

DEPUTY DEAN
Dr. S. B. Chimidza
)BSc, PGDE (UB); MSc (University of Surrey, England
)PhD (University of Gothenburg, Sweden

FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR
L.M. Paledi
)BA, MPA (UB

ACTING HR MANAGER

BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE

Ms. T. Mosesene

CHEMISTRY
COMPUTER SCIENCE

MPA (Human Resource Management) UB
BBA (Human Resource Management) (Wichita State

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE

)University, Kansas

GEOLOGY
MATHEMATICS
PHYSIC

172

FACULTY OF SCIENCE
FACULTY OF SCIENCE
Faculty of Science Special Regulations
The mission of the Faculty of Science is to promote
science with particular attention to the development
of Botswana. Towards achieving this mission, the
Faculty shall promote excellence in teaching and
learning, research and service. In teaching and learning
the Faculty shall stimulate to acquire and generate
knowledge and skills in the various branches of science
so that they will be both productive in the workplace
and develop attitudes that aim to make them possible
members of society. In research the Faculty shall
endeavour to conduct both applied and pure research in
Science subjects. The members of the Faculty shall aim
to provide service in various capacities at both national
and international levels.
Introduction
The Faculty of Science compromises seven Departments
• Department of Biological Sciences
• Department of Chemistry
• Department of Computer Science
• Department of Environmental Science
• Department of Geology
• Department of Mathematics
• Department of Physics
Objectives of the Faculty
The objectives of the Faculty are:
a) To promote excellence in teaching and research service
b) To develop the critical abilities of students through the
Faculty of Science
c) To help students become responsible members of
society through their education and proficiency in the
various branches of Science;
d) To cooperate with other faculties in the training of
various professionals. For example, in the Faculty of
Education, students registered for the Bed (Science),
Bed (Secondary Education) and the Bed (Science
Education) Degrees are taught all their Science content
by the Faculty of Science. BSc Degree holders do their
Postgraduate Diploma in the Faculty of Education.
Students registered for BEd(Sc), BNS (Nursing Science),
and BEd (Home Economics) are also taught their
Science content by the Faculty of Science. In addition,
the Faculty’s Department of Environmental Science has
been responsible for the teaching of Environmental
Science to students in the Faculty of Humanities,
Education and Social Sciences;
e) To provide a firm Year 1 foundation in the basic
Sciences for those students who transfer to other
Faculties, for example, to the Faculty of Agriculture to
take the BSc(Agric) Degree, and those who transfer to
the Faculty of Engineering and Technology to take the
BEng Degree;
f) To provide a firm intellectual base for those students
who are designated for transfer to other institutions
to take programmes which are not offered in this
University, for example, Medicine, Veterinary Science,
Pharmacy;
g) To prepare its graduates for further study and
postgraduate work in various fields of Science;
h) To conduct research in various fields of Science,
especially as they relate to Botswana;
i) To recommend to the Senate those students who have

qualified for the award of the following qualifications:
the Diploma in Computer Studies, the Bachelor of
Science (BSc) Degree and the Master of Science (MSc)
Degree. The MPhil and PhD Degree Programmes are now
offered in most of the Departments.
Special Regulations for the Faculty of Science
Subject to the provision of the General Academic
Regulation, the following Special Regulations in the
Faculty of Science shall apply:
23.1 Programme Titles and Degrees
• Bachelor of Science (Biological Sciences)
• Bachelor of Science (Chemistry)
• Bachelor of Science (Computer Science)
• Bachelor of Science (Environmental Science)
• Bachelor of Science (Geology)
• Bachelor of Science (Mathematics)
• Bachelor of Science (Physics)
• BIS (Computer Information Systems)
• Bachelor of Science (Computing with Finance)
• Bachelor of Science (Information Technology)
• Bachelor of Science (Applied Geophysics)
• Bachelor of Science (Physics with Meteorology)
• Bachelor of Science (Radiation and Health Physics)
• Bachelor of Science (Mathematics of Finance)
• Bachelor of Science (Computer Science)
Graduate Programmes are offered in the Departments
of Computer Science, Biological Sciences, Chemistry,
Environmental Science, Geology, Mathematics and
Physics. For Programme Titles, see departmental sections.
23.2 Entrance Requirements
23.2.1 Admission to Level 100 of the Bachelor of Science
Degree Programme shall be on the basis of performance
in the Botswana General Certificate of Secondary
Education (BGCSE) examination, or its equivalent, in the
Science subjects. Cut-off points shall be determined by
the Directorate of
Academic Services.
23.2.2 Applications who register for the Bachelor of
Science Degree Programmes shall fulfil the following
requirements:
a) To have taken at least 5 subjects, including English
Language and Mathematics at the Botswana General
Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE) examination
or a 1 sitting of its equivalent;
b) To have obtained a minimum grade of Pass in English
Language;
c) To have obtained a minimum grade of Credit, or its
equivalent in Mathematics.
23.2.3 In addition to the above basic requirements,
applications for the Bachelor of Science Programmes
must have the following:
a) A minimum grade of C, or its equivalent, in at least 2
of the following subjects: Physics,
Chemistry, Biology or: b) A minimum grade of BB, or its
equivalent, in Science: Double Award or its equivalent,
or:
c) A minimum of A, or it’s equivalent in the subject
Physical Science and C in Biology.
23.2.4 The other qualifying subject must be one of the
following:
a) Development Studies

173

b) Literature in English
c) Design and Technology
d) Agriculture
e) Art
f) Food and Nutrition
g) Computer Studies
h) Fashion and Fabrics
i) Business Studies
j) Home Management
k) Any other subject deemed appropriate by the Faculty
of Science.
23.2.5 An applicant who has taken the relevant
Advanced (A)-level or equivalent examinations and who
has attained a minimum of 1 E and 2 O’s in the relevant
subjects may be admitted to a Bachelor of Science
Degree Programme.
23.2.6 If an applicant has a Grade E or better at the
Advanced (A)-level, or equivalent qualifications
in Science subjects, he/she may, subject to the
recommendation of the relevant Head of Department
and approval of the Deputy Dean, be awarded credits
and exempted from equivalent course(s) prescribed for
a Degree Programme.
23.3 Degree Structure
23.3.1 The single Major Programme shall be composed
of core and optional courses from one subject, as well
as electives and General Education Courses. In order to
partially satisfy the requirement for a
Degree, a student must take and pass a minimum of 80
credits in the relevant subject.
23.3.2 The Combined Degree (Major/Minor) Programme
shall be composed of core and optional courses from
2 subjects, normally in the ratio of major/minor
approximately 70-30, as well as electives and General
Education Courses. In order to partially satisfy the
requirements for a Degree, a student must take and pass
a minimum of 56 credits from the major subject and a
minimum of 24 credits from the minor subject.
23.3.3 The Combined Degree (Major/Major) Programme
shall be composed of core and optional courses from
2 equally-weighted subjects that are independently
studies, as well as electives and
General Education Courses. In order to partially satisfy
the requirements for a Degree, a student must take
and pass a minimum of 40 credits from each of the 2
subjects.
23.3.4 The Combined Degree (Multi-disciplinary)
Programme shall be a Faculty-approved programme
composed of core and optional courses from more than
2 subjects, as well as electives and General Education
Courses.
23.3.5 In Semesters I and 2 of any Degree Programme
offered in the Faculty of Science, each student shall
take courses in Mathematics as well as courses from 2
or, with the permission of the Deputy Dean, 3 subjects
from the following:
Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Geology and Statistics
(where Statistics is a subject in the
Faculty of Social Sciences).
23.3.6 A student registered in the Combined Degree
Programme (Major/Major or Major/Minor shall carry out
a Project in only one of his/her major subjects of study.
The mode of assessment shall be as prescribed under
Special Department Regulations.

23.4 Assessment
23.34.1 Assessment shall be as prescribed in General
Academic Regulation 00.8.
23.4.2 Performance in each course shall normally be
evaluated by the combination of continuous assessment
and final examination marks in which continuous
assessment shall not exceed 50 percent of the final
grade. Any departure from this ratio shall require the
approval of the Faculty Board.
23.5 Progression from Semester to Semester
23.5.1 At the end of each semester, a student’s progress
will depend on his/her pass of the attempted semester
credit and any of the recommendations outlined under
general regulation 00.9 may be made.
23.6 Award of Degree
23.6.1 To be awarded a Degree, a student must satisfy
the appropriate provision of General Academic
Regulations 00.851 and 00.852.
23.6.2 The Degree shall be classified in accordance with
the provisions of General Academic Regulation
20.4, with the cumulative GPA computed in accordance
with General Regulation 00.86.
23.7 Special Regulations for the Master of Science
Degree
The Faculty of Science degree offers the Master of
Science Degree in Departments for which such
programmes have been approved. General Regulation
40.0 and Special Departmental Regulations shall apply.
23.8 Special Regulations for MPhil and PhD Degrees
23.8.1 The Faculty of Science offers the MPhil and PhD
Degrees in Departments for which such programmes
have been approved. General Regulation 50.0 and
Special Department Regulations shall apply.
23.9 Minimum CA to Qualify for Examinations
23.9.1 A minimum continuous assessment mark of 40%
is required to sit for final examinations.

DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
Departmental Regulations For Undergraduate
Degree Programmes
1.0 Preamble
1.1 General Provisions
Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations and the Faculty of Science Special
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply.
1.2 Programmes and Titles of Degrees
The Department of Biological Sciences offers the
following programmes leading to the award of the
mentioned degrees:
(i) Single Major Programme leading to the award
of the degree of Bachelor of Science (Biological
Sciences, Single Major); B.Sc. (Biological Sciences).
(ii) Combined degree (Major/Minor) programme with
Biological Sciences as the Major leading to the
award of the degree of Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.).
(iii) Combined degree (Major/Major) programme with
Biological Sciences and another Science subject
leading to the award of the degree of Bachelor of

Science (B.Sc.).
(iv) Combined degree (Minor/Major) programme with
Biological Sciences as the Minor leading to the
award of the degree of Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.).
1.3 General Aim
The Department of Biological Sciences is convinced
that national development efforts in agriculture,
environment, health, industrial production, natural
resources utilisation and management, tourism and
others have biological components. Cognisant of this,
the Department aims to play a leading role in the
training of high quality personnel and independent
thinkers in various fields of Biological Sciences and its
applications.
1.4 Programme Objectives
(i) To provide effective teaching in Biological
Sciences so as to produce competent
graduates capable of functioning efficiently in
the workplace
(ii) To offer training that will produce academics
in the field of Biological Sciences willing and
capable to further contribute to the subject
through independent research
(iii) To train graduates with capacity to apply
their acquired knowledge and skills to solving
biological and related problems
1.5 Entrance Requirements
Admission to the Biological Sciences shall be as specified
in the Faculty of Science Special Regulations. Entrance
requirements specific to particular programmes shall be
as specified under the specific programmes below.
2.0 Structure of the Programme
The Department of Biological Sciences shall:
(i) Offer courses at levels 100 to 400 for the
undergraduate programme
(ii) From time to time, design and offer courses for
specific needs of other Departments in the
University provided there are no suitable courses
already on offer.
(iii) Contribute to General Education Courses offered
through the Faculty of Science.
(iv) Offer a Single Major Degree programme as per
Departmental Special Regulations 2.1.
(v) Offer a Combined Degree Major/Minor
programme as per Departmental Special
Regulations 2.2.
(vi) Offer a Combined Degree Major/Major
programme as per Departmental Special
Regulations 2.3.
(vii) Offer a Combined Degree Minor/Major programme
as per Departmental Special Regulations 2.4.
2.1 SINGLE MAJOR (Biological Sciences)
To be admitted into the Single Major (Biological Sciences)
programme, a student must have obtained at least Grade
C (GPA: 2.5) in both BIO111 and BIO112.
2.1.1 Semesters 1 and 2
All students who wish to pursue the Biological Sciences
programme as Single Major should, in addition to BIO111
and BIO112, must take and pass CHE101 and CHE102.
2.1.2 Semesters 3 and 4
Students must take BIO211, BIO214, BIO217 and BIO218
in Semester 3.
Students must take BIO212, BIO213, BIO215 and BIO216
in Semester 4.
Students are also advised to take as electives CHE211
& CHE213 (Analytical Chemistry), CHE232 & CHE234

174

(Organic Chemistry) and CHE242 & CHE244 (Physical
Chemistry).
2.1.3 Semesters 5 and 6
Students must take BIO301, BIO307 and at least two
Optional Courses in Semester 5.
Students must take BIO306, BIO308 and at least two
Optional Courses in Semester 6.
2.1.4 Semesters 7 and 8
Students must take BIO453 and at least 3 Optional
Courses in semester 7.
Students must take BIO454 and at least 3 Optional
Courses in semester 8.
2.1.5 Template for degree in Biological Sciences (Single
Major)
COURSE
Semester 1
BIO111
Principles of Biology 4
CHE101
General Chemistry I 4
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Plants & Animals 4
CHE102
General Chemistry II 4
Semester 3
BIO211
Cell Biology 3
BIO214
Introduction to Mammalian Physiology
(prerequisites BIO111& BIO112)
(pre.req. to BIO317, BIO424) (3) 3
BIO217
Animal Diversity
(prerequisites BIO111 & BIO112)
(pre-req.to BIO315, BIO421, BIO425) 3
BIO218
Biology of Flowering Plants 3
Semester 4
BIO212
Genetics 3
BIO213
Plant Structure & Function
(pre-requisites BIO111&BIO112)
(pre-req.to BIO311, BIO316) 3
BIO215
Principles of Ecology 3
BIO216
General Microbiology 3
Semester 5
BIO301
Quantitative Biology 3
BIO307
Biochemistry 3
Optional 3
Optional 3
Semester 6
BIO306
Developmental Biology
(pre-requisite BIO211) 3
BIO308
Molecular Biology 3
Optional 3
Optional 3
Semester7
BIO453
Research Proposal Writing (2)
Optional 3
Optional 3
Optional 3
Semester 8
BIO454
Research Project (4)
Optional 3
Optional 3
Optional 3

2.2 COMBINED DEGREE (MAJOR/MINOR)
To be admitted into the Combined degree (Major/Major)
programme, a student must have obtained at least
Grade C (GPA: 2.5) in both BIO111 and BIO112.
2.2.1 Semesters 1 and 2
All students who wish to pursue the Biological Sciences
degree programme as a Major/Minor should, in
addition to BIO111 and BIO112, must take and pass
CHE101 and CHE102.
In Semesters 3 and 4, students must take BIO211 or
BIO212 and at least 2 out of BIO214, BIO216, BIO217,
BIO218 in Semester 3.
Students must take BIO211 or BIO212 and BIO215, and
either BIO213 or BIO216 in Semester 4.
2.2.2 Semesters 3 and 4
Students must take BIO211 and at least 2 out of
BIO214, BIO217, BIO218 in Semester 3.
Students must take BIO212 and BIO215, and either
BIO213 or BIO216 in Semester 4.
Students are also advised to take as electives CHE211
& CHE213 (Analytical Chemistry), CHE232 & CHE234
(Organic Chemistry) and CHE242 & CHE244 (Physical
Chemistry).
2.2.3 Semesters 5 and 6
Students must take BIO301, BIO307 and at least
1 Optional Course in Semester 5.
Students must take BIO306, BIO308 and at least 1
Optional Course in Semester 6.
2.2.4 Semesters 7 and 8
Students must take BIO453 and at least 2 Optional
Courses in semester 7.
Students must take BIO454 and at least 2 Optional
Courses in semester 8.
2.2.5 Template for Combined Degree (Major/Minor)
Semester 1
BIO111
Principles of Biology 4
CHE101
General Chemistry I 4
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Plants & Animals 4
CHE102
General Chemistry II 4
Semester 3
BIO211
Cell Biology 3
At least 2 out of BIO214, BIO217 and BIO218 3
Semester 4
BIO212
Genetics 3
BIO215
Principles of Ecology 3
Either BIO213 or BIO216 3
Semester 5
BIO301
Quantitative Biology 3
BIO307
Biochemistry 3
Optional 3
Semester 6
BIO306
Developmental Biology 3
BIO308
Molecular Biology 3
Optional 3
Semester 7
BIO453
Research Proposal Writing 3
Optional 3
Optional 3

Semester 8
BIO454
Research Project 3
Optional 3
Optional 3
2.3 COMBINED DEGREE (MAJOR/MAJOR)
2.3.1 Semesters 1 and 2
Students are required to take and pass BIO111 and
BIO112.
Students are also advised to take CHE101 and CHE102.
2.3.2 Semesters 3 and 4
Students must take BIO211 or BIO212 and at least 1
outof BIO214, BIO217, and BIO218 in Semester 3.
Students must take BIO212 or BIO211 and at least 1 out
of BIO213, BIO215 and BIO216 in Semester 4.
2.3.3. Semesters 5 and 6
Students must take BIO301 and/or BIO307 and/or 1
Optional Course in Semester 5.
Students must take BIO306 and/or BIO308 and/or 1
Optional Course in Semester 6.
2.3.4 Semesters 7 and 8
Students must take at least 2 Optional Courses from
the Level 400 in each semester. One of the Optional
Courses may be BIO453 (Project proposal Writing) and
BIO454(Research Project) worth 3 credits each.
2.3.5 Template for Combined degree (Major/Major)
Semester 1		
BIO111
Principles of Biology 4
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Plants & Animals 4
Semester 3		
BIO211
Cell Biology /BIO 212 Genetics 3
		
At least 1 out of BIO214, BIO217 and
BIO218 3
Semester 4
BIO212
Genetics /BIO 211 Cell Biology 3
At least 1 out of BIO213, BIO215 and BIO216 3
Semester 5
BIO301 or BIO307 or Optional 3
Semester 6
BIO306 or BIO308 or Optional 3
Semester 7
Optional 3
Optional 3
Semester 8
Optional 3
Optional 3
2.4 COMBINED DEGREE (MINOR/MAJOR)
Students who wish to take Biological Sciences as a Minor
can take any 8 courses, each course worth 3 credit hours,
as long as they satisfy prerequisites for the courses they
select.
2.5 COURSE LIST WITH PREREQUISITES
All courses are worth 3 credits each except BIO111, BIO112
and BIO454 (worth 4 credits each), and BIO453 (worth
2 credits). Students who wish to pursue Single Major,
Major/Minor or Major/Major in Biological Sciences must
take and pass BIO111 & BIO112.

175

Semester 1
BIO111
Principles of Biology (prerequisite to
Single Major, Major/Minor and Major)
Semester 2
BIO112
Diversity of Animals and Plants (pre-req.
to Single Major, Major/Minor)
Semester 3
BIO211
Cell Biology (prerequisites BIO111, BIO112)
(pre-req.to BIO307 (3credits) 		
BIO212
Genetics 				
(prerequisites BIO111& BIO112) 		
(pre-req.to BO308) (3)
BIO214
Introduction to Mammalian Physiology
(prerequisites BIO111& BIO112)(pre.req.
to BIO317) (3)
BIO216
Genera Microbiology			
(prerequisites BIO111&BIO112) pre-req.to
BIO309, BIO310, BIO312, BIO416, BIO416,
BIO418, BIO419, BIO420, BIO436) (3)
(also offered in semester 4)
BIO217
Animal Diversity (prerequisites BIO111 &
BIO112)(pre-req.to BIO315) (3)
BIO218
Biology of Flowering Plants 		
(prerequisites BIO 111, BIO 112) (3)
Semester 4
BIO211
Cell Biology (prerequisites BIO111 & BIO112)
(pre-req.to BIO307) (3) (also offered in
semester 3)
BIO212
Genetics (prerequisites BIO111&BIO112)
(pre-req.to BIO308) (3 credits) (also
offered in semester 3)
BIO213
Plant Structure and Function 		
(prerequisites BIO111&BIO112) (pre-req.
BIO111&BIO112) (pre-req.toBIO316) (3)
BIO215
Principles of Ecology 			
(prerequisites BIO111 & BIO112)
(pre-req. to BIO313, BIO314, BIO408,BIO409,
BIO411,BIO412,BIO426, BIO429, BIO434) (3)
BIO216
GeneralMicrobiology
(prerequisites BIO111 & BIO112)
(pre-req.to BIO309, BIO310, BIO312,
BIO416, BIO418, BIO419, BIO420, 		
BIO420,BIO436) (3)
(also offered in semester 3)
Semester 5
BIO301
Quantitative Biology (3)
BIO307
Biochemistry (prerequisite to BIO308
and BIO417) (3)
BIO309
Mycology (prerequisite BIO216) (3)
BIO313
Dynamics of Savannah Ecosystems (pre
requisite BIO215) (3)
BIO315
Invertebrate Zoology(pre-req.to BIO421
and BIO422) (3)
BIO316
Plant Physiology (prerequisite BIO213) (3)
BIO317
Comparative Vertebrate Physiology
		
(prerequisite BIO214) (3)
Semester 6
BIO306
Developmental Biology (3)
BIO308
Molecular Biology 			
(prerequisite to BIO417) (3)
BIO310
Bacteriology (prerequisite BIO216) (3)
BIO311
Plant Systematics (Pre-requisite BIO213) (3)
BIO312
Virology (prerequisite BIO216) (3)
BIO314
Conservation Biology 			
(prerequisite BIO215) (3)
BIO318
Chordates (3)
BIO412
Aquatic Biology (pre-req.BIOio215) (3)
BIO424
Vertebrate Structure (3)

Semester 7
BIO403
Applied Botany (3)
BIO409
Life History Strategies (pre-req BIO215) (3)
BIO417
Biotechnology (pre-req BIO307 & 		
BIO308) (3)
BIO419
Medical Microbiology (pre-req BIO216, BIO
310 and either BIO 312 or BIO 309 and
either BIO 312 or BIO 309) (3)
BIO421
Entomology (pre-req BIO 217) (3)
BIO423
Exercise Physiology (pre-req BIO214) (3)
BIO425
Parasitology(pre-req BIO217) (3)
BIO426
Behavioural Ecology(pre-req.BIO215) (3)
BIO427
Evolution (pre-req BIO212) (3)
BIO431
Plant Responses to Environmental Stress (3)
BIO432
Plant Tissue Culture (3)
BIO436
Environmental Microbiology (prerequisite
BIO216, BIO 310 and BIO 309) (3)
BIO453
Research Proposal Writing (2)
Semester 8
BIO408
Wildlife Biology of Southern Africa
		
(prerequisite BIO215) (3)
BIO411
Wetlands Ecology and Management
		
(prerequisite BIO215) (3)
BIO416
Immunology (prerequisite BIO216, BIO 312
and either BIO 309 or BIO 310)) (3)
BIO418
Food Microbiology (prerequisite BIO216,
BIO 310 and either BIO 309 or BIO 312) (3)
BIO420
Plant Pathology (prerequisite BIO216, BIO
309 and either BIO 310 or BIO 312) (3)
BIO422
Applied Entomology (pre-req BIO421) (3)
BIO424
Vertebrate Structure (pre-req BIO214) (3)
BIO429
Ecological Impact Assessment 		
(prerequisite BIO215) (3)
BIO430
Post-harvest Physiology (3)
BIO434
Plant Ecology (prereq BIO215) (3)
BIO454
Research Project BIO454 (pre-req.BIO453 (4)
2.6 BACHELOR OF EDUCATION (B.Ed) DEGREE
B.Ed students can take any of the courses in Biological
Sciences as prescribed by the Faculty of Education as
long as they satisfy course prerequisites.
2.7 SERVICE COURSES
These courses are NOT available for students taking
the BSc (Single Major, Major/Minor or Major/Major)
program with Biological Sciences as the Major.
2.7.2 Bachelor of Nursing Education
BIO120
Introductory Biochemistry (3)[Semester 2]
BIO223
Parasitology for Health Sciences (3)
[Semester3]
BIO231
Human Anatomy (3) [Semester 3]
BIO232
Human Physiology (3) [Semester 4]
2.7.2 Family and Consumer Sciences
Courses for the Bachelor of Education in Home Economics
Education shall be specified by the Department of Family
and Consumer Sciences. Two such courses are:
BIO122
BIO123

Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry (3)
[Semester 1]
Introduction to Microbiology and Stored
Products Entomology [Semester 2]

2.8 Assessment and Examination
i) All courses except BIO453 and BIO454 shall normally
(unless otherwise stated) be assessed on the basis of
continuous assessment and one final examination in
the ratio of 2:3 (CA: Exam). Continuous Assessment
shall be comprised of at least one written test, one
practical and one assignment.
ii) There shall be no written examination in BIO453 and
BIO454.

BIO453 shall be assessed as follows:
1. Class quizzes and assignments 10%
2. Tests 10%
3. Oral presentation 20%
4. Proposal report 60%
BIO454 shall be assessed as follows:
1. Progress reports to the supervisor 10%
2. Project report 60%
3. Oral presentation 30%

(c) Combined Degree Programme (Chemistry Major)
Students in the Combined Degree programme with
a Major in Chemistry, in addition to the 34 credits
taken in Year One, must complete a minimum of
47 credits in Chemistry, a minimum of 3 credits
each in Mathematics and Physics, and 12 credits in
General Education courses. Students must also meet
the requirements for the second Major or Minor as
specified by the appropriate department.
(d) Combined Degree (Major/ Minor) Programme
(Chemistry Minor)

DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY
Departmental Regulations for Undergraduate Courses
The Department has a curriculum that will enable
undergraduates to qualify for a Bachelors Degree
in the single subject of Chemistry, and a Bachelors
Degree with a Major in Chemistry and a Major or a
Minor in one other Science subject.
The Department also offers a Minor programme in
Chemistry. The Department offers the following
programmes:
• Single Major programme leading to a Bachelor of
Science Degree in Chemistry
• A Combined Degree with a Major in Chemistry and
a Major or Minor in another Science subject leading
to a Combined Bachelor of Science Degree.
1.1 Entry Requirements
To enter into any of the Chemistry programmes, in
addition to fulfilling the faculty requirements for
progression from Year One to Year Two, students
must also have the following:
(a) For entry into the SINGLE MAJOR
PROGRAMME,
a student must obtain a minimum of B average in the
level 100 chemistry courses with no less than a C+ grade
in CHE 102 or a student must obtain a minimum of B
average in the level 200 chemistry courses including
laboratory courses with no less than a C grade in any of
these courses.
(b) For entry into the CHEMISTRY AS MAJOR IN A
COMBINED DEGREE PROGRAMME, a student must
obtain a minimum of C+ average in the level 100
chemistry courses with no less than a C grade in any of
these courses or a student must obtain a minimum of
C average in the level 200 chemistry courses including
laboratory courses with no less than a C- grade in any
of these grades.
1.2 Programme Outlines and Structures
(a) Common First Year Programme
Two general Chemistry courses, CHE101 and CHE102,
each consisting of 3-credit lectures and a 1-credit
lab, will be offered to the common programme
for first year Science students. For a student to be
awarded a grade for level 100 chemistry course he/
she must have completed the practical component
(b) Single Major Programme ( Entry to single major
programme is by application to HOD)
In the Single Major programme, students take 85
credits of core courses, 20 credits of General
Education courses, and will have opportunities
to select more credits from a range of optional
and elective courses. Eleven (11) credits of each of
Mathematics and Physics courses, are included in the
core credits.

176

Students in the Combined Degree (Major/Minor)
programme with a Minor in Chemistry, in addition
to the 34 credits taken in Year One, must complete
18 credits in Chemistry core courses consisting of 12 core
credits in Year Two, 4 core credits in Year Three,
and 2 credits of Year Three practical.
COMMON FIRST YEAR PROGRAMME
Semester 1
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4 credits)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4 credits)
PHY112
Geometrical optics and Mechanics,
Vibrations and Waves (4 credits)
COM141 Communication and Academic
Literacy Skills (Science) (3credits)
ICT121
Computing Skills Fundamentals 1
(2 credits)
Service Courses
CHE107
Chemistry Applied to family and
Consumer Sciences (3 credits)
CHE109
Introductory Chemistry for BNS
(3 credits)
Recommended Electives
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3 credits)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3 credits)
Semester 2
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4 credits)
(Pre-req) CHE101
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4 credits)
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
		
Modern Physics (4 credits)
COM142 Academic and Professional 		
Communiction (Science) (3 credits)
ICT122
Computing Skills Fundamentals 2
		
(2 credits)
Recommended Electives
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3 credits)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3 credits)
MKT100 Principles of Marketing (3 credits)
CHEMISTRY AS SINGLE MAJOR PROGRAMME
Semester 3
Core Courses
CHE211
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102)
CHE213
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory I
		
(1 credit) (Pre - req CHE 101 &
		
CHE 102; Co-req CHE211)
CHE232 Structure and Survey of Functional
		
Groups I (2 credits) 			
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102)
CHE234 Organic Chem. Lab I (1 credit) (Pre-req
		
CHE101 and CHE 102; co-req CHE 232)
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics I (3 credits)
		
PHY231/PHY232 Mechanics, Vibrations
		
& Waves, Physical Optics(3 credits)/

Properties of Matter, Basic Thermodynamics
and introduction to Nuclear Physics
(3credits)
Semester 4
Core Courses
CHE221
Atomic Structure, Bonding and Main
		
Group Chemistry (2 credits) 		
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102)
CHE223 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
		
(CHE 101 & CHE 102; Co-req CHE221)
CHE242 Introductory Physical Chemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102, MAT122)
CHE244 Physical Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
		
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE 102 ; Co-req
CHE242)

Semester 5
Core Courses
CHE311
Separation Techniques (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE211)
CHE321
Coordination Chemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE221)
CHE323 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
		
(Pre req CHE 223; Co-req CHE321)
CHE331
Structure and Survey of Functional
		
Groups II (3 credits) (Pre-req CHE232)
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamic and
		
Electrochemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE 242)
CHE343 Physical Chemistry Laboratory II
		
(1 credit) (Pre-req CHE242 & CHE 244)
CHE351
Chemical Informatics (1 credit)
Recommended Electives
BIO307
Biochemistry (3 credits)
PHY353 Mathematical Methods for Physical
		
Sciences (3 credits)
Semester 6
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE311)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory II
		
(1 credit) (Pre-req CHE 311; Co req
		
CHE 312)
CHE322 Group Theory and Organometallic
Chemistry (3 credits) (Pre-req CHE321)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2 credits)
(Pre-req CHE232 & CHE 331)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
		
(Pre-req CHE234 & CHE 331)
CHE342 Quantum Chemistry & its Applications
		
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE242)
CHE352 Literature based Project (1 credit)
		
Pre-req CHE351+ all 200 level courses
+ at least one section at 300 level in
which student intends to carry out 		
the literature survey) (For Chemistry
major students only)
Semester 7
Core Courses
CHE411
Advanced Analytical Techniques (3 credits)
(Pre-req CHE311& CHE312)
CHE421
Advanced Transition Metal Chemistry
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE322)
CHE431
Heterocyclic Chemistry, Synthetic
		
Reactions and Design of Organic ]
		
Synthesis (3 credits) (Pre- req CHE331
		
& CHE 332)
CHE441
Advanced Physical Chemistry I (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE341)

Optional Courses: Take at least ONE course from the
following
CHE413
Advanced Analytical Chemistry
Laboratory (2 credits) (Pre-req CHE311 ,
CHE312 & CHE 314)
CHE423 Advanced Inorganic Laboratory (2 credits)
(Pre req CHE 323; Co-req CHE421)
CHE433 Advanced Organic Chemistry Laboratory
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE334)
CHE443 Physical Chemistry Laboratory III
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE343)
CHE446 Special Topics in Physical Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE341 & CHE342)
Recommended Elective
PHY472 Statistical Mechanics (3 credits)
PHY 473 Solid State Physics (3 credits)
Semester 8
Core Course
CHE452 Student Research Project (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE352)
Optional Courses: Take at least 9 Credits from the
following
CHE412
Sample Handling & Biochemical Analysis
		
(3 credits)(Pre-req CHE311& CHE312)
CHE416
Environmental Chemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE311 and CHE312 Co-req
		
CHE412)
CHE418
Special Topics in Analytical Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE311 &CHE312)
CHE422 Advanced Organo-metallic and Solid
State Chemistry (3 credits) (Pre-req CHE322)
CHE426 Special Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE322)
CHE432 Secondary Metabolites and Biomolecules
		
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE331& CHE 332)
CHE436 Special Topics in Organic Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE331)
CHE442 Advanced Physical Chemistry II
		
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE341)
CHE470
Excited State Chemistry (2 credits)

CHE223
CHE242
CHE244

(Pre-req CHE101 & CHE102)
Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
(CHE 101 & CHE102; Co-req CHE221)
Introductory Physical Chemistry (2 credits)
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102, MAT122)
Physical Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE 102 ;		
Co-req. CHE242)

Semester 5
Core Courses
CHE311
Separation Techniques (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE211)
CHE321
Coordination Chemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE221)
CHE323 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory II
		
(1 credits) (Pre ñ Req CHE 223;
		
Co-req CHE321)
CHE331
Structure and survey of functional groups II
(3 credits) (Pre Req: CHE 232)
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamic and
Electrochemistry (2 credits) (Pre-req CHE242)
CHE343 Physical Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE242 & CHE 244)
CHE351
Chemical Informatics (1 credit)
Recommended Electives
BIO 307
Biochemistry (3 credits)
PHY 353 Mathematical Methods of Physics I(3 credits)
Semester 6
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE311)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory II
		
(1 credit) (Pre-req CHE311 Co req
		
CHE 312)
CHE322 Group Theory and Organometallic
Chemistry (3 credits) (Pre-req CHE321)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2 credits)
(Pre-req CHE232 & CHE 331)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE234 & CHE331)
CHE352 Literature based Project (1 credit)
		
(Pre-req CHE351+ all 200 level courses +
		
at least one section at 300 level in which
		
student intends to carry out the literature
		
survey) (For Chemistry major students only)

CHEMISTRY AS MAJOR SUBJECT IN COMBINED DEGREE
Semester 3
Core Courses
CHE211
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102)
CHE213
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory I
		
(1 credit) (Pre - req CHE 101 & CHE 102;
		
Co-req CHE211)
CHE232 Structure and Survey of Functional
Groups I (2 credits) (Pre-req CHE 101 &
CHE102)
CHE234 Organic Chem. Lab I (1 credit)
		
(Pre-req CHE 101 and CHE 102; co-req
		
CHE 232)
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics (3 credits)
		
PHY231/PHY 232 Mechanics , Vibrations
		
& Waves, Physical Optics (3 credits)/
		
Properties of Matter , Basic
		
Thermodynamics and Introduction to
		
Nuclear Physics ( 3 credits)
Semester 4
Core Courses
CHE221
Atomic Structure, Bonding and Main
Group Chemistry (2 credits) 		

177

Semester 7
Optional Courses: Take at least 6 Credits from the
following
CHE411
Advanced Analytical Techniques (3 credits)
(Pre-req CHE311 & CHE312)
CHE421
Advanced Transition Metal Chemistry
		
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE322)
CHE431
Heterocyclic Chemistry, Synthetic Reactions
and Design of Organic Synthesis (3 credits)
(Pre-req CHE331 & CHE332)
CHE441
Advanced Physical Chemistry I (3 credits)
(Pre-req CHE341)
Semester 8
Core Courses
CHE342 Quantum Chemistry & its Applications
		
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE242)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE234 & CHE331)
CHE452 Student Research Project (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE352)
Recommended Elective
ENS402
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (3 credits)

CHEMISTRY AS MINOR SUBJECT IN COMBINED DEGREE
Semester 3
Core Courses
CHE211
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
		
(2 credits) (Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102)
CHE213
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE101 & CHE102, 		
Co- req CHE211)
CHE232 Structure and Survey of Functional
		
Groups I (2 credits) (Pre-req CHE 101&
CHE102)
CHE234 Organic Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE 101 and CHE 102; co-req
		
CHE 232)

ENS402

Semester 4
Core Courses
CHE221
Atomic Structure, Bonding and Main
Group Chemistry (2 credits) (Pre-req
		
CHE 101 &CHE102)
CHE223 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory I
		
(1 credit) (Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE 102
		
Co-req. CHE221)
CHE242 Introductory Physical Chemistry (2 credits)
(Pre-req CHE 101 & CHE102, MAT122)
CHE244 Physical Chemistry Laboratory I (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE101 & CHE102, Co-req CHE242)
Required to take at least 6 Credits including 2 Credits of
Laboratory Courses from the CHE Courses in Semester
5 and 6

1.5 Award of Degree
The award of the degree shall be as per General
Regulations 00.852
2.0 Department of Chemistry Course Listing

Semester 5
CHE311
Separation Techniques (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE211)
CHE321
Coordination Chemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE221)
CHE323 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
(Pre req CHE 223, Co-req CHE321)
CHE331
Structure and Survey of Functional
		
Groups II (3 credits) (Pre-req CHE232)
CHE341
Applications of Thermodynamic and
Electrochemistry (2 credits) (Pre-req CHE242)
CHE343 Physical Chemistry Laboratory II (1 credit)
(Pre-req CHE242 & CHE 244)
CHE351
Chemical Informatics (1 credit)
Semester 6
CHE312
Analytical Spectroscopy (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE311)
CHE314
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory II
		
(1 credit), (Pre-req CHE 311 Co req
		
CHE 312)
CHE322 Group Theory and Organometallic Chem
istry (3 credits) (Pre-req CHE321)
CHE332 Physical Organic Chemistry (2 credits)
		
(Pre-req CHE232 & CHE 331)
CHE334 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II
		
(1 credit) (Pre-req CHE234 & CHE 331)
CHE342 Quantum Chemistry and Applications
		
(3 credits) (Pre-req CHE242)
Recommended Electives
BIO308
Molecular Biology (3 credits)
MGT303 Entrepreneurship and New Business
Formations (3 credits)
Semester 7
Not required to take any Chemistry courses.
Semester 8
Not required to take any Chemistry courses.
Recommended Electives

Natural Resources Management and
Economics ( 3 credits)

1.3 Assessment and Examination
The coursework shall be continuously assessed.
Continuous assessment shall consist of written
tests, assignments and laboratory exercises where
applicable. The weighting of final examination where
applicable, shall not be less than 50% of the overall
grade for a given course.
1.4 Progression from one Semester to the next Semester
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as
per General Regulations 00.9

100 Level Courses
CHE101 GENERAL CHEMISTRY I (4 credits)
Course covers fundamental concepts and principles
of chemistry, i.e. the structure of matter, quantitative
as well as qualitative aspects of chemistry.
CHE102 GENERAL CHEMISTRY II (4 credits)
This is a continuation of CHE101. The fundamental
principles associated with properties of chemical
systems will be presented.
CHE107 CHEMISTRY APPLIED TO FAMILY AND CONSUMER
SCIENCES (3 credits)
The role that chemistry plays in everyday life will be
presented. Atomic structure, periodic table, oxidation
and reduction, chemistry of carbon compounds, acids
and bases, soaps and detergents, food and energy, fats,
carbohydrates, proteins, minerals and vitamins, additives,
poisons and toxins, gases, polymers and plastics,
cosmetics.
CHE109 INTRODUCTORY CHEMISTRY FOR BACHELOR OF
NURSING SCIENCE, BNS
(3 credits)
Topics include: Structure and bonding, stoichiometry,
solutions, chemistry of certain elements, electricity and
chemical change, osmosis, reaction rates and catalysis,
radioactivity.
200 Level courses
CHE211 INTRODUCTION TO ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
(2 credits)
Basic principles of analytical chemistry, concepts
of classical and modern methods in analytical
chemistry, statistical treatment of experimental
data including error analysis and significance tests;
Gravimetry, titrimetry.
CHE213 ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY I(1
credit)
Practical experience in analytical procedures, classical
and modern methods of analytical chemistry, an
overview of analytical instrumentation and the progress
made towards development of analytical methodology,
gravimetric analysis, titrimetric analysis, Electro
analytical/ spectrophotometry.
CHE221 ATOMIC STRUCTURE, BONDING AND MAIN
GROUP CHEMISTRY (2 credits)
Structure of the atom based on elementary quantum

178

theory. Bonding in simple molecules based on molecular
orbital and valence bond theories; Trends in periodic
properties and chemical reactions of s- and p-block
elements.
CHE223 INORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY I (1 credit)
This course covers qualitative inorganic analysis, the
synthesis of a selection of compounds, as well as
solution chemistry of main group elements.
CHE232 STRUCTURE AND SURVEY OF FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS I (2 credits)
Survey of various functional Groups; Aspects of
stereochemistry; Review of alkanes, alkenes and alkynes:
addition and substitution reactions. Organic halogen
compounds: substitution and elimination reactions,
aromatic compounds, and electrophilic substitution
reactions. Introduction to chirality, Acids and bases,
alcohols, ethers, epoxides, carbonyl compounds.
CHE234 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY I
(1 credit)
Course topics include: Purification and separation
of organic compounds-distillation and fractional
distillation, crystallization and recrystallization melting
point and refractive index determination; Introduction
to qualitative analysis of organic compounds;
Preparations of simple organic compounds.
CHE242 INTRODUCTORY PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY (2
credits)
Basic principles of thermodynamics: first, second
and third laws of thermodynamics; rates of chemical
reactions.
CHE244 PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY I
(1 credit)
This is an introduction to laboratory techniques in
physical chemistry, Experiments dealing with properties of solutions, Calorimetry, thermodynamics,
electrochemistry and chemical kinetics.
300 level courses
CHE311 SEPARATION TECHNIQUES (3 credits)
Introduction to chromatographic separation and
detection techniques: Liquid-liquid extraction; column
chromatography, TLC, GC and HPLC, Supercritical fluid;
Capillary electrophoresis. Detection systems include
FID/ECD & thermal conductivity for GC. UV-Vis,/ DAD/
fluorescence detector for HPLC. Electrochemical /
conductivity detectors for Ion Chromatography.
CHE312 ANALYTICAL SPECTROSCOPY (2 credits)
Introduction to spectroscopic methods. Molecular
absorption & emission:- UV-visible, IR, phosphorescence,
fluorescence, Fourier transform spectroscopy. Atomic
absorption & emission techniques; AAS /AES and ICP-MS.
CHE314 ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY II
(1 credit)
Introduction to practical aspects of spectroscopic
methods of analysis: UV-visible, IR, Fourier transform
spectroscopy, GC, HPLC, AAS/AES, etc.
CHE321 COORDINATION CHEMISTRY
(2 credits)
Introduction to nomenclature, properties and reactions
of coordination compounds & complexes; isomerism
and magnetic properties. Valence bond and crystal
field theories; absorption spectra; field strength; Jahn-

Teller effects; covalency and electron delocalization in
complexes. Thermodynamics of complex formation. Hard
and soft acids and bases. Non-aqueous chemistry. The
chemistry of d-block elements and their compounds.
Trends in the properties of elements of groups 3 to 12.
CHE322 GROUP THEORY AND ORGANOMETALLIC
CHEMISTRY (3 credits)
Introduction to group theory and basic knowledge of
organo-metallic chemistry. Fundamental concepts of
organometallic chemistry; organometallic chemistry
of transition elements; catalytic applications of
organometallic compounds.
CHE323 INORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY II (1
credit)
Synthesis of inorganic compounds and their
characterization using various techniques such as NMR,
IR and UV-VIS spectroscopy; Reactions of transition
elements and their compounds.
CHE331 STRUCTURE AND SURVEY OF FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS II (3 credits)
Spectroscopic methods in organic chemistry: UV, IR NMR
and MS. Stereochemistry: Chirality, chiral compounds
without stereogenic centres, prochiral centres. Theory of
aromaticity, nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Conformations of
cycloalkanes. Reactions of enolate anions: Aldol, Claisen
and Knoevenegel condensations, Michael addition and
Robinson annulation reactions. Enamines. The Mannich
reaction.
CHE332 PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (2 credits)
Study of reaction mechanisms. Review of nucleophilic
substitution and elimination reactions - E1, E2, Sn1,
Sn2, Sni, and E1CB. Structure ñ reactivity relationships:
equilibrium and rate constants – the Hammett equation.
Methods for determining reaction mechanisms.
Pericyclic reactions: Frontier Molecular Orbital Theory,
cycloadditions, electrocy-clic reactions and sigmatropic
rearrangements.
CHE334 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY III (1 credit)
Introduction to modern synthetic and characterization
methods for organic compounds: Preparation of liquid
and solid products then separation, purification and
identification by physical and spectroscopic propertiesUV, IR and NMR techniques. Chemical and spectroscopic
methods in qualitative analysis of organic compounds.
Molecular modeling. Simulation of spectra.
CHE341 APPLICATIONS OF THERMODYNAMIC AND
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (2 credits)
Introduction to the applications of chemical thermosdynamics to solutions and electrochemical processes.
Partial molar quantities, thermodynamics of mixing,
properties of ideal solutions, non-ideal solutions,
activity and activity coefficient, phase diagrams,
chemical equilibrium, conductivity, ion activities,
standard potentials, electrochemical cells applications
of standard potentials.
CHE342 QUANTUM CHEMISTRY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
(3 credits)
Microscopic concepts of physical chemistry. Basic
principles of quantum mechanics, postulates, simple
quantum mechanical systems (particle in a1-D and
3-D box), rotational and vibrational energy levels
in molecules, rotational, vibrational and electronic
spectroscopy, photophysical and photochemical
processes in molecules and atoms, photochemical
kinetics.

CHE343 PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY II (1 credit)
Practical familiarization with microscopic and time
dependent macroscopic aspects of physical chemistry.
Laboratory experiments in application of quantum
chemistry, spectroscopy, photochemical kinetics,
conductivity and transport phenomena.
CHE351 CHEMICAL INFORMATICS (1 credit)
Use of conventional and electronic chemical
information resources. An overview of information
resources in chemistry. Purpose of scientific literature.
Peer review process. Electronic and non-electronic
databases. Searching methodologies including Internet
searching (use of chemical web browsers). Searching
for information using chemical names, CAS numbers,
structures, sub-structures, molecular formulas, etc.
Searching material safety data sheets (MSDS).

CHE352 LITERATURE BASED PROJECT (1 credit)
Course will cover professional writing in chemistry and
scholarly project reports. Writing styles in chemistry:
comprehensive report on an assigned topic in chemistry
under the supervision of an academic staff. ; Thorough
search of the chemical literature including the latest
information available on the subject.
400 Level Courses
CHE411 ADVANCED ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES
(3 credits)
Advanced analytical methods: Statistical treatment
of experimental data; Electroanalytical Chemistry;potentiometry, voltammetry, coulometry, classical and
modern polarography, Instrumentation and application
of GC-MS, LC-MS, CE-MS, tandem MS, Thermochemical
and Radiochemical methods of analysis; isotope dilution
and activity analysis.
CHE412 SAMPLE HANDLING AND BIOCHEMICAL
ANALYSIS (3 credits)
Sampling strategies, sample preparation and clean-up
techniques; solid phase extraction, solid phase micro
extraction, dialysis, solvent extraction, supported liquid
membrane. Enzymatic analysis methods; application
of immobilised enzymes, competetive binding
immunoassays, enzyme immunoassays, proteomics, and
genomics. Properties of antibodies. Polymer structure
elucidation of carbohydrate polymers; precipitation
assays.
CHE413 ADVANCED ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY (2 credits)
Modern instrumental methods of analysis: atomic
absorption (AAS), flame emission, graphite furnaceAAS, inductively coupled plasma- AAS. Sample handling
strategies. Micro high performance anion exchange
chromatography. Hyphenated techniques; LC-MS, MScapillary electrophoresis, electrochemistry workstations.
CHE416 ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY (2 credits)
Introduction to environmental pollutants and their
analysis using local case studies e.g., SO2 emission
from the BCL mine; Pesticide analysis, industrial waste
management; Selection of safe methods of disposal.
Degradation reactions and the dispersal pathways of
materials into the environment.
CHE418 SPECIAL TOPICS IN ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
(2 credits)
Special topics selected from the following: Application
of Analytical Chemistry, Food, Drugs and Forensic
Analysis, Chemostatistics and Clinical Analysis.

179

CHE421 ADVANCED TRANSITION METAL CHEMISTRY
(3 credits)
Advanced topics in transition metal chemistry and
introductory bio-inorganic chemistry. Electronic
properties of transition metal complexes; magnetic
properties of transition metal complexes; inorganic
reaction mechanisms; introduction to photo-chemical
reactions; f-block chemistry; introduction to bioinorganic
chemistry.
CHE422 ADVANCED ORGANOMETALLIC AND SOLID
STATE CHEMISTRY (3 credits)
Organometallic Chemistry: Main group organometallics;
structure and chemistry of (C5H5)2MLn complexes;
organometallic chemistry in synthesis; stereochemically
non-rigid molecules; metal clusters and metal-metal
bonds; low- and high-nuclearity clusters; NMR spectra;
Latimer diagrams, oxidation state stability. Solid state
chemistry: lattices; crystal packing; ionic structures;
crystal defects; metallic bonding; spinels.
CHE423 ADVANCED INORGANIC LABORATORY
(2 credits)
Physical methods in Inorganic Chemistry: the study of
physical and chemical properties of transition metal and
organometallic complexes using electronic, infrared, and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy techniques
as well as optical isomerism, reaction kinetics, and inert
atmosphere techniques.
CHE426 SPECIAL TOPICS IN INORGANIC CHEMISTRY (2
credits)
Selection may be made from the following specialised topics: Nanochemistry, Synthesis of inorganic
materials for the fabrication of semiconductors;
Molecular orbital calculations; Kinetics and mechanisms
of inorganic reactions in solution media; Applied
homogeneous catalysis with organometallic compounds;
Chemistry and applications of boranes, carboranes and
metalloboranes.
CHE431 HETEROCYCLIC CHEMISTRY SYNTHETIC
REACTIONS AND DESIGN OF ORGANIC SYNTHESIS (3
credits)
Aromaticity and reactions of heterocyclic compounds ñ furan, pyrrole, thiophene, pyridine, indole,
and quinoline. Synthetic reactions, Protective groups.;
Molecular rearrangements. Design of organic synthesis:
introduction to disconnection approach / retrosynthetic
analysis.
CHE432 SECONDARY METABOLITES AND BIOMOLECULES
(3 credits)
Carbohydrates: structure, nomenclature, stereochemistry
and reactions of monosaccharides and disaccharides.
Structure and properties of polysaccharides. Amino
acids and proteins: structure, nomenclature and
stereochemistry of amino acids and peptides, analysis
of peptides and proteins. Chemistry of purines and
pyrimidines. Nucleosides, nucleotides and nucleic acids.
Mechanisms of co-enzymes. Examples of secondary
metabolites from the acetate, mevalonate and shikimic
acid pathways.
CHE433 ADVANCED ORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY
(2 credits)
Advanced laboratory techniques in organic synthesismulti-step synthesis of organic compounds. Extraction
and isolation of naturally occurring compounds from
plant origin- application of chromatographic and
spectroscopic methods. Analysis of mixtures of organic
compounds.

CHE436 SPECIAL TOPICS IN ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (2
credits)
Selection may be made from the following specialised
topics: Chemistry of drugs; Chemistry of lipids; Selected
natural products; Agrochemicals; Free radicals and
photochemistry; Polymer materials
CHE441 ADVANCED PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY I
(3 credits)
Entropy and probability, partition functions, applications
of statistical thermodynamics. Colloidal solutions,
electrical double layer, Liquid-gas and liquid-liquid
interfaces, Gibbs adsorption equation, spreading, solidgas interface, adsorption isotherms, rates of surface
processes, adsorption and catalysis.
CHE442 ADVANCED PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY II
(3 credits)
Reaction kinetics, techniques of fast reactions, theories
of reaction rates, reaction in solution, composite
reactions, chain reactions, explosions.
Transport
phenomena. Polymers, kinetics of polymerization,
osmometry, viscometry, gel-permeation chromatography, TGA, DSC. Introductory polymer processing.
CHE443 PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY III (2
credits)
Laboratory experiments in polymers, surface and colloid
chemistry.
CHE446 SPECIAL TOPICS IN PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY (2
credits)
Detailed treatment of topics chosen from: solid-state
chemistry; irreversible thermodynamics; molecular
dynamics; intermolecular forces; atmospheric and/or
astrophysical chemistry.
CHE452 STUDENT RESEARCH PROJECT (3 credits)
The course involves scientific bench work research.
Will comprise a study leading to a written report
and shall be based on an original investigation of
a chemical problem. To be carried out under the
supervision of a member of staff.
CHE470 EXCITED STATE CHEMISTRY (2 credits)
Boltzmann population distributions, comparison of
ground and excited states, methods of excitation,
experimental methods of studying excited states,
chemistry of the excited states of molecules, Application
of chemistry of excited states (e.g. Lasers.)

DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER
SCIENCE
The department offers the following undergraduate
single major programmes leading to the award of:
a) B.Sc. (Computer Science),
b) B.Sc. (Computing with Finance),
c) BIS (Computer Information Systems)
d) B.Sc. (Information Technology)
It also offers combined Major/Minor programmes leading
to the award of:
a) B.Sc. (other subject Major/ Computer Science Minor)
B.Sc. (Computer Science)
Entry Requirements
Subject to the General Academic Regulation 00.5, the

following departmental programme entry requirements
shall apply for the programmes:

CSI354
CSI374

i) For entry into 100-level, candidates must have a
minimum grade of C in Mathematics and two other
science subjects with computer studies recognized as
a science subject and with a minimum grade of D
in English.
ii) For entry into the programme at higher level, the
following shall apply.
a. Transfer student from a Computer Science or
Information Systems or equivalent programme
from a higher institution considered equivalent
to the University of Botswana, subject to General
Academic Regulation 00.313.
b. Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
which is considered by the department as
being at least equivalent to the 100- level of
the programme and so deemed to earn the
candidate an exemption from the 100-level of
the programmes.
c. Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
who do not meet criteria b) above may be
required to take some 100-level courses
Semester I
Core courses
CSI131
Discrete Structures I (3)
CSI141
Programming Principles (3)
CSI161
Introduction to Computing (3)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4)
COM141 Communication and Academic Literacy
skills (Science) (3 credits)
Semester II
Core Courses
CSI132
Discrete Structures II (3) (Pre-req CSI131)
CSI142
Object-Oriented Programming (4) 		
(Pre-req CSI141)
MAT122
Introductory Mathematics II (4) 		
(Pre-req MAT111)
STA122
Introductory Concepts of Probability (4)
COM142 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Science) (3)
Semester III
Core Courses
CSI247
Data Structures (3) (Pre-req CSI132,
CSI142)
CSI243
Functional Programming (4)(Pre-req
CSI142)
CSI213
Discrete Structures III (3) (Pre-req CSI132)
MAT221 Calculus I (3)
Elective *(3)
*- students are advised to take MGT202 which is a prerequisite to MGT303
Semester IV
Core Courses
CSI262
Database Concepts (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
CSI223
Systems Programming (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
CSI251
Computer Architecture & Organization (3)
(Pre-req CSI161, CSI141)
MAT212 Introductory Linear Algebra (3)
Elective (3)
Semester V
Core courses
CSI323
Algorithms(3)(Pre-req CSI247)

180

CSI342

Operating Systems(3)			
(Pre-req CSI247, CSI251)
Computer Networks (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI142, CSI251)
Systems Analysis & Design (3) 		
Pre-req CSI262)

Elective (3)
Semester VI
Core Courses
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3)
(Pre-req CSI262, CSI374)
CSI332
Programming Languages (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI243)
CSI341
Introduction to Software Engineering (3)
(Pre-req CSI342)
Optional Courses
(Min 6 credits from)
CSI344
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence (3)
(Pre-req CSI247)
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI342)
MGT303 Entrepreneurship and New Business
Formation (3) (Pre-req MGT202)
Winter Semester
CSI352
Industrial Attachment (3)		
(Pre-req CSI354, CSI374, CSI342)
For semester VII and VIII, students choose from the
following areas of specialization:
1. Software Engineering
2. Systems & Networks
Semester VII
Core courses
CSI413
Theory of Computation (3)		
(Pre-req CSI323)
CSI475
Social Informatics (3) (Pre-req CSI352)
CSI481
Database Systems(3 credits)		
(Pre-req.CSI262)
Software Engineering stream
Optional Courses (minimum 6 credits)
CSI473
Software Design (3)(Pre-req CSI341)
CSI443
Requirements Engineering (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI341)
CSI435
Intelligent Systems (3) (Pre-req CSI344)
		
Systems & Networks stream
Optional Courses (minimum 6 credits)
CSI462
Distributed Computing (3) (Pre-req
CSI354, CSI374)
CSI453
Sensors Networks (3) (Pre-req CSI374)
CSI493
Computer Graphics (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
Semester VIII
Core courses
CSI408
Project (4) (Pre-req CSI352, CSI315, CSI341)
CSI428
Programming Language Translation (3)
(Pre-req CSI413)
CSI468
Computer Networks & Security (3) (Prereq CSI374)
Software Engineering stream
Optional Courses (minimum 6 credits)
CSI444
Software Project Management (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI443 or CSI473)
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI342)
CSI345
Integrative Programming (3) (Pre-req
CSI223, CSI354)
Systems & Networks stream

Optional Courses (minimum 6 credits)
CSI464
Mobile Computing (3) (Pre-req CSI374)
CSI424
Network Algorithms (3)(Pre-req CSI374,
CSI323)
Minor in Computer Science
The following courses constitute a minor in Computer
Science with a total credit of 34.
First Year
CSI131
CSI141
CSI161
CSI132
CSI142

Discrete Structures I(3)
Programming Principles (3)
Introduction to Computing (3)
Discrete Structures II (3 credits)
Object-Oriented Programming (4)

Second Year
CSI247
Data Structures (3)
CSI262
Database Concepts (3)
CSI251
Computer Architecture & Organization (3)
Third Year
CSI354
Operating Systems (3)
CSI374
Computer Networks (3)
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3)
Services Courses
The following courses are available as service courses for
other departments.
CSI101
Computing Fundamentals (3)
CSI102
Programming with C++ (3)
CSI104
Programming with VB.NET (3)
CSI105
Introduction to Web Design (3)
B.Sc. Computing with Finance
Entry Requirement
Subject to the General Academic Regulation 00.5, the
following departmental programme entry requirements
shall apply for the programme:
For entry to the B.Sc. Computing with Finance, the
following entry requirements shall apply.
i) For entry into 100-level, candidates must have a
minimum grade of C in Mathematics and two other
science subjects with Computer Studies recognized as
a science subjectand with a minimum grade of C in
English.
ii) For entry into the programme at higher level:
a. Transfer students from a Computing with Finance
or equivalent programme from a higher institution
considered equivalent to the University of Botswana,
subject to General Academic Regulation 00.313.
b. Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
which is considered by the department as being at
least equivalent to the 100- level of the programme
and so deemed to earn the candidate an exemption
from the 100-level of the programmes.
c. Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
who do not meet criteria b) above may be required to
take some 100-level course
Semester I
Core Courses
CSI141
Programming Principles (3)
CSI161
Introduction to Computing (3)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4)
CSI131
Discrete Structures I (3)
COM141 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)

Semester II
Core Courses
ACC100
Introduction to accounting (3)
CSI142
Object-Oriented Programming (4) (Prereq CSI141)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4) (Pre-req
MAT111)
CSI132
Discrete Structures II (3) (Pre-req CSI131)
COM142 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Science) (3)
Semester III
CSI247
Data Structures (3) (Pre-req CSI132,
CSI142)
FIN200
Business Finance (3)
MAT221 Calculus I (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credits from)
MGT202 Small Business Management (3)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
Semester IV
Core Courses
CSI262
Database Concepts (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
ACC200 Financial Accounting I (3) (Pre-req 		
ACC100)
CSI251
Computer Architecture & Organization
(3) (Pre-req CSI141, CS161)
STA114
Business Statistics (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
Semester V
Core Courses
CSI354
Operating Systems (3) (Pre-reqCSI247,
CSI251)
FIN301
Financial Institutions and Markets I (3)
(Pre-req FIN200)
CSI374
Computer Networks (3) (Pre-req CSI141,
CSI251)
CSI342
Systems Analysis & Design (3) (Pre req
CSI262)
ACC302 Auditing I(3) (Pre-req ACC200)
Semester VI
Core courses
FIN302
Financial Planning and Forecasting (3)
(Pre-req FIN200)
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3)
(Pre-req CSI262, CSI374)
FIN300
Financial Management (3) 		
(Pre-req FIN200)
CSI341
Introduction to Software Engineering (3)
(Pre-req CSI342)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credits from)
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3)(Pre-req
CSI342)
MGT303 Entrepreneurship and New Business
Formation (3) (Pre-req MGT202)
Winter Semester
Core course
CSI352
Industrial Attachment (3)
(pre-req CSI354, CSI374, CSI342)
Semester VII
Core Courses
CSI473
Software Design (3) (Pre-req CSI341)
CSI481
Databases (3) (Pre-req CSI262)
CSI323
Algorithms (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
CSI475
Social Informatics (3) (Pre-req CSI352)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credits from)
FIN402
International Business Finance (3)

181

CSI443
CSI435

(Pre-req FIN301)
Requirements Engineering (3) (Pre-req
CSI341)
Intelligent Systems (3) (Pre-req CSI344)

Semester VIII
Core Courses
CSI408
Project (4) (pre-req CSI352, CSI315, CSI341)
CSI454
Information Security Administration (3)
(Pre-req CSI374)
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems (3)
(Pre-req ACC200)
Optional Courses (Min 6 credits from :)
FIN404
Investment Analysis and Portfolio 		
Management (3) (Pre-req FIN300)
FIN403
Financial Institution and Markets II (3)
(Pre-req FIN301)
CSI420
Web Computing (3) (Pre-req CSI315)
CSI444
Software Project Management (3)
(Pre-req CSI473)
B.Sc. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Entry Requirements
Subject to the General Academic Regulation 00.5, the
following departmental programme entry requirements
shall apply for the programme:
i.) For entry into 100-level, candidates must have a
minimum grade of C in Mathematics and two other
science subjects with computer studies recognized as
a science subject and with a minimum grade of D in
English.
ii.) For entry into the programme at higher level:
a. Transfer student from an Information Technology
or equivalent programme from a higher institution
considered equivalent to the University of Botswana,
subject to General Academic Regulation 00.313.
b. Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
which is considered by the department as being at
least equivalent to the 100- level of the programme
and so deemed to earn the candidate an exemption
from the 100-level of the programmes.
c. Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
who do not meet criteria b) above may be required to
take some 100-level courses
Semester I
Core courses
CSI131
Discrete Structures (3)
CSI141
Programming Principles (3)
CSI161
Introduction to Computing (3)
STA116
Introduction to statistics (4 credits)
COM141 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
Semester II
Core Courses
CSI132
Discrete Structures II (3) (Pre-req CSI131)
CSI142
Object-Oriented Programming
(4 credits) (Pre-req CSI141)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4 credits)
COM142 Academic and Professional 		
Communication (Science) (3)
		
Optional Courses (Min 3credit from)
STA211
Statistical Methods (3)
LIS227
Introduction to Knowledge Management (3)
Semester III
Core courses
CSI247
Data Structures (3) (Pre-req CSI132,
CSI142)
CSI244
Information Management (3)
CSI293
Information Technology Fundamentals (3)
MGT100 Principles of Management (3)

MAT122
ECO111

Introductory Mathematics II (4)
Basic Micro Economics (3)

Semester IV
Core courses
CSI262
Database Concepts (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
CSI263
Computer Architecture (3)(Pre-req
CSI161)
CSI223
Systems Programming (3) (Pre-req CSI247)
MGT200 Organizational Design and Development (3)
(Pre-req MGT100)
Optional Courses (Min 3 from)
ECO112
Basic Macro Economics (3)
STA211
Statistical Methods (3)
LIS227
Introduction to Knowledge Management (3)
Semester V
Core courses
CSI354
Operating Systems (3) (Pre-req CSI263,
CSI247)
CSI374
Computer Networks (3) (Pre-req CSI141,
CSI263)
CSI342
Systems Analysis & Design (3) (Pre-req
CSI262)
MGT301 Organizational Behaviour (3) (Pre-req
MGT200)
Elective * (3 credits)
*- students are advised to take MGT202 which is a prerequisite to MGT303
Semester VI
Core courses
CSI345
Integrative Programming (3) (Pre-req
CSI354, CSI223)
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3 s)
(Pre-req CSI262, CSI374)
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3)
(Pre-req CSI342)
CSI341
Introduction to Software engineering (3)
(Pre-req CSI342)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credit from)
MGT303 Entrepreneurship and Business
Formation (3 credits) (Pre-req MGT202)
BIS304
Management Information Systems (3)
Winter Semester
Core courses
CSI352
Industrial Attachment (3)
(Pre-req CSI354, CSI374, CSI342)
Semester VII
Core courses
CSI481
Database Systems (3)(Pre-req CSI262)
CSI475
Social Informatics (3) (Pre-req CSI352)
CSI482
Information System Engineering (3) (Prereq CSI345)
CSI485
System Administration (3) 		
(Pre-req CSI354, CSI374)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credit from)
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3)
FIN200
Business Finance (3)
LIS 403
Knowledge Management (3) 		
(Pre-req LIS227)
Semester VIII
Core courses
CSI408
Project (4)(Pre-req CSI352, CSI315, CSI341)
CSI420
Web Computing (3 credits) 		
(Pre-req CSI315)
CSI454
Information Security Administration (3)
(Pre-req CSI374)
CSI446
Information Systems Project
Management (3) (Pre-req CSI482)

Elective (3 credits)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credits from)
BIS417
Information System auditing (3)
MKT401 Marketing Management and Strategy (3)
BIS (Computer Information Systems)
Subject to the General Academic Regulation 00.5, the
following departmental programme entry requirements
shall apply for the program BIS (Computer Information
Systems).
i.) For entry into 100-level, candidates must have
a minimum grade of C in Mathematics and two
other science subjects with computer studies
recognized as a science subject and with a
minimum grade of D in English.
ii.) For entry into the program me at higher level, the
following shall apply.
a.) Transfer student from a Computer Science or
Information Systems or equivalent programme
from a higher institution considered equivalent
to the University of Botswana, subject to General
Academic Regulation 00.313.
b.) Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
which is considered by the department as
being at least equivalent to the 100-level of
the program me and so deemed to earn the
candidate an exemption from the 100-level of
the programmes.
c.) Candidates holding a post-Secondary qualification
who do not meet criteria b) above may be
required to take some 100-level courses.
Semester I
Core courses
STA101
Mathematics for Social Sciences I (4)
ISS101
Information Systems Foundations I (3)
CSI161
Introduction to Computing (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
COM141 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
Semester II
Core courses
STA102
Mathematics for Social Sciences II (4)
ISS102
Information Systems Foundations II (3)
(Pre-req ISS101)
ISS112
Introduction to Programming (3)
ACC100
Introduction to Accounting (3)
COM142 Academic and Professional
Communication (Science) (3)
Semester III
Core courses
ISS211
Intermediate Programming (3)(Pre-req
ISS112)
ISS221
Data & Information Management I(3)
CSI247
Data Structures (3) (Pre-req ISS112)
FIN200
Business Finance (3)
MGT202 Small Business Management (3)
Semester IV
Core courses
ISS212
Advanced Programming (3) (Pre-req
ISS211)
ISS202
IT Tools and Productivity (3) (Pre-req
ISS112)
CSI263
Computer Architecture (3) (Pre-req
CSI161)
STA114
Business Statistics (3)

182

Semester V
Core courses
ISS321
Data & Information Management II (3)
(Pre-req ISS221)
ISS331
Network Management (3)
ISS323
Information Systems Analysis (3) (Pre-re
qISS102)
CSI354
Operating Systems (3) (Pre-req CSI263,
CSI247)
Elective (3)
Semester VI
Core courses
ISS324
Information Systems Design and 		
Implementation (3 credits) (Pre-req ISS323)
ISS332
System Administration (3) (Pre-req ISS331)
ISS334
Information Systems Security (3)
(Pre-req. ISS331)
CSI315
Web Technology and Applications (3)
(Pre-req ISS221, ISS331)
Optional Courses (Min 3 credits from)
MGT303 Entrepreneurship & New Business 		
Formation (3) (Pre-req MGT202)
CSI392
Human Computer Interaction (3)
(Pre-req ISS221)
Winter Semester
ISS302
Industrial Attachment (3) (pre-req ISS202
& ISS211)
Semester VII
Core courses
ISS431
Enterprise Architecture (3) (Pre-req ISS324)
ISS441
IS Project Management (3) (Pre-req ISS324)
ISS443
IS Research (3 credits) (Pre-req STA114)
CSI418
Decision Support Systems (3) 		
(Pre-req ISS321)
Elective (3)
Semester VIII
Core courses
ISS402
IS Project (4 credits) (Pre-req ISS212,
ISS321, ISS324)
ISS442
IS and Society (3)
ISS446
Strategic IS Management (3)(Pre-req
ISS102)
CSI420
Web Computing (3) (Pre-req CSI315)
Elective (3)

DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
PROGRAMME STRUCTURES
In accordance with the Departmental Regulations set
out in Section 5.1 above,
a) Environmental Science courses shall be offered from
levels 100 to 400 to students from the Faculties of
Humanities and Social Science, and from levels 200
to 400 to students from the Faculty of Science.
b) In accordance with Academic General Regulation
00.2124 and Faculty of Science Special Regulation
32.46 in addition to Environmental Science courses,
students shall take General Education Courses (GECs)
and Electives.
c) The Department of Environmental Science shall offer
GECs under Area 5 of Academic General Regulation
00.2124 as indicated in Regulation 2.2 subject to the
availability of resources and facilities.

Physical Environment Programme
The Physical Environment programmes are designed for
students registered in the Faculty of Science, subject to
the Departmental Regulations 5.1 b, c, d & e
Programme Courses Level 100 Courses
In accordance with Faculty of Science Special Regulation
23.45, Environmental Science is not offered at this level
to students in the Faculty of Science.

Levels 200 Courses
Semester 3 Courses
Core Courses
ENS211
The Earth Environment System (3) 		
(Pre-reg ENS 101, or Bio 111, or CHE 101,
or PHY 112)
ENS242
Introduction to Spatial Analysis (3)
Optional Course None
ENS251
The Human Environment System (3)
(Pre-reg ENS102, or BIO111, or CHE101,
or PHY 122)
Electives
Students are advised to take at least one course from
Geology, Chemistry, Biology, or Physics(3)
Semester 4 Courses
Core Courses
ENS243
Introduction to Remote Sensing(3)
Optional Courses
ENS241
Quantitative Techniques in 		
Environmental Science (3) 		
(Pre reg ENS 142 or STA 101/STA 116/STA
121/STA 122/MAT 122)
ENS252
Botswana Environment 3 credits
ENS260
Environment and Population 		
Dynamics (3) (Pre reg ENS 102 or ENS 251)
Electives
Students are advised to take at least one course from
Geology, Chemistry, Biology or Physics (3
Levels 300 - 400 Courses
a)Single Major Programme
In accordance with Academic General Regulations 00.62,
the Single Major programme in the Physical Environment
shall consist of 12 credits core and optional courses, and
3 credits from Electives/GECs in each of Semesters 5 to
8. The optional courses may be selected from the list of
courses provided in each semester. Courses ENS 381,
ENS 382, ENS 481 and ENS 482 jointly satisfy Faculty
Regulation 23.47(i). Availability of courses is subject to
the staffing situation in the particular semester. Please
confirm registration with the Department.
Physical Environment Career Areas:
Semester 5 Courses
Core Courses
(Single Majors only)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS342
Elements of GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS381
Introduction to Research Methods in
		
Environmental Science (3) (Pre-req ENS
211or ENS 241 or ENS251)
Optional Courses
ENS311
Biogeography (3) (Pre-req ENS211)

ENS313
		
ENS315
ENS317
ENS320
ENS341
		
		
ENS345
		
ENS348

General Climatology (3)
(Pre-req ENS211 or ENS 241 or PMT299)
Process Geomorphology (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
Principles of Hydrology (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
Principles of Soil Science(3) (ENS211)
Advanced Quantitative Techniques in
Environmental Science (3)
(Pre-req ENS 241 0r ENS142 or STA102 or
STA 116 or STA 121 or MAT 122)
Air Photo-Interpretation (3)
(Pre-req ENS 243)
Analytical Methods in Environmental
Quality Assessment (3) 		
(Pre-reg ENS211 or ENS241 or ENS252
or BIO111 or CHE101 or ENH211)

Semester 6 Courses
Core Courses (Single Majors only)
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
(Pre-req ENS 301)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis (3) 		
(Pre-reg ENS 242)
ENS344
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (3) (Pre-req ENS 243 or		
CGB 211 or CGB 221)
ENS382
Project Proposal (3) (Pre-req ENS 381)
Optional Courses
ENS312
Range Ecology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS314
Synoptic and Dynamic Climatology(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 241 or PMT 299)
ENS316
Geomorphological Techniques (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or GEO 111 or GEO 112
or CGB 222)
ENS318
Water Resources Development and
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or
ENS 251 or ENH 330)
ENS319
Pedology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
Semester 7 Courses
Core Courses (Single Majors only)
ENS481
Project Data Collection, Processing &
		
Analysis (3) (Pre-req ENS 382)
Optional Courses
ENS403
Environmental Hazards and Disaster
		
Management (3)
		
ENS413
Physical Climatology (3) (Pre-req ENS 313
or ENS 314 0r PMT 299 or PMT 321)
ENS415
Arid Lands Geomorphology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 315 or ENS 316)
ENS417
Hydrological Analysis (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS419
Soil Survey (3) (Pre-req ENS 319 or 		
ENS 320)
ENS441
Multivariate Quantitative Techniques in
Environmental Science (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 341)
ENS442
Advanced GIS (3) pre-req ENS 342 or
		
CGB224 or CGB 416
ENS447
Environmental Quality Management
		
for Land & Air (3) (Pre-req ENS348 or
BIO 111 or CHE 101 or ENH 211)
ENS449
Land Reclamation (3)
ENS457
Energy and Environment (3)
		
pre-req ENS 352 or ENS 353
Semester 8 Courses
Core Courses (Single Majors only)
ENS404
Environmental Impact Assessment (3)
ENS482
Project Report (3) (Pre-req ENS 481)

183

Optional Courses
ENS412
Methods & Techniques in Rangeland
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 311 or
ENS 312)
ENS414
Applied Climatology (3)
(Pre-req ENS 313 or ENS 314 )
ENS416
Applied Geomorphology (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 315 or ENS 316)
ENS418
Applied Hydrology (3) (Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS420
Applied Soil Science (3)
(Pre-req ENS 320 or ENS 319)
ENS421
Climates of Southern Africa (3)
(Pre-req ENS 313 or ENS 314)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography (3) (Pre-req ENS 343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis (3)
(Pre-req ENS344 or CBG 224 or CBG 416)
ENS448
Environmental Quality Management for
Water and Waste Water (3)
(Pre-req ENS348 or BIO111 or CHE101 or
ENH 211)
ENS456
Transport & environment (3)
(Pre-req ENS 353) (NOT OFFERED
IN 2019/2020)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (3)
b) Major-Minor (Environmental Science as Major)
programme
In semesters 5 to 8 accordance with Academic General
Regulation 00.62, the Major-Minor programme in
physical environment shall consist of 6 or 9 credits of
optional courses, to make up a total of no more than
15 credits per academic year. The optional courses are
to be selected from the list provided for each semester.
Availability of courses is subject to the staffing situation
in the particular semester. Please confirm registration
with the Department.
Semester 5 Courses
Core courses
ENS342
Elements of GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS242)
ENS381
Introduction to Research Methods in
		
Environmental Science (3) (Pre-req ENS 211
or ENS241 or ENS251)
Optional Courses
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues
		
(3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS311
Biogeography 3 (3) ) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS313
General climatology (3) ) 		
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 241 or PMT 299)
ENS315
Process Geomorphology (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS317
Principles of Hydrology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS211)
ENS320
Principles of Soil Science (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Techniques in
		
Environmental Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS241 or ENS 142 or STA 102
or STA 116 or STA 121 or MAT 122)
ENS345
Air Photo-Interpretation (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS243)
ENS348
Analytical Methods in Environmental
		
Quality Assessment (3) (Pre-reg ENS241
or ENS 211or ENS 252 or BIO 111 or CHE 101
or ENH 211)
Semester 6 Courses
Core Courses (Single Majors only)
ENS344
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (3) (Pre-req ENS 243 or 		
CGB 211or CGB 221)

ENS382

Project Proposal (3) (Pre-req ENS 381)

Optional Courses
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS301)
ENS312
Range Ecology (3) (Pre-req ENS211)
ENS314
Synoptic and Dynamic Climatology (3)
(Pre-req ENS211 or ENS 241 or PMT 299)
ENS316
Geomorphological Techniques (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS211or GEO111 or GEO112 or
CGB 222)
ENS318
Water Resources Development and
		
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS211 or
		
ENS251 or ENH 330)
ENS319
Pedology (3) (Pre-req ENS211)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS242)
Semester 7 Courses
Core Courses (Single Majors only)
ENS404
Environmental Impact Assessment (3)
ENS481
Project Data Collection (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 382)
Optional Courses
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (3)
ENS403
Environmental Hazards and Disaster
		
Management (3)
ENS413
Physical Climatology (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 313 & ENS 314 or PMT 299
or PMT 321)
ENS415
Arid Lands Geomorphology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS315 or ENS316)
ENS417
Hydrological Analysis (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS317)
ENS419
Soil Survey (3) (Pre-req ENS319 or 		
ENS 320)
		
(Pre-req ENS341)
		
(NOT OFFERED IN 2019/2020)
ENS442
Advanced GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS342 		
CGB224 or CGB416)
ENS447
Environmental Quality Management
		
for Land & Air (3) (Pre-req ENS348 or
BIO 111 or CHE 101 or ENH 211)
ENS449
Land Reclamation (3)
ENS457
Energy and Environment (3)
		
(prereq ENS352/353)
Semester 8 Courses
Core courses
ENS482
Project Report (3) (Pre-req ENS 481)
Optional Courses
ENS412
Methods & Techniques in Rangeland
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 311
		
or ENS 312)
ENS414
Applied Climatology(3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 313 or ENS 314)
ENS416
Applied Geomorphology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 315 or ENS 316)
ENS418
Applied Hydrology (3) (Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS420
Applied Soil Science (3) (Pre-req ENS320
or ENS 319)
ENS421
Climates of Southern Africa (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS313 or ENS 314)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography (3) (Pre-req ENS 343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis
		
(3) (Pre-req ENS 344 or CGB224 or
CGB416)
ENS448
Environmental Quality Management
		
for Wasteand Waste Water (3) 		
(Pre-reg ENS 348 or BIO 111 or CHE 101
or ENH 211)

ENS458
ENS483
		

Gender and Environment (3)
Research Essay (3)
(Pre-reg ENS 211 or ENS 251 or ENS 364)

c) Major-Major programme
In accordance with Academic General Regulation 00.62,
the Major-Major programme in physical environment
shall consist of 6 credits from optional courses, with
optional courses selected from the list provided for each
semester. Course ENV 483 satisfies Faculty regulation
23.47(ii). Availability of courses is subject to the staffing
situation in the particular semester. Please confirm
registration with the Department
Semester 5 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues
		
(3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS311
Biogeography (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS313
General Climatology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211
or ENS 241 or PMT 299)
ENS315
Process Geomorphology (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS317
Principles of Hydrology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS320
Principles of Soil Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Techniques in
		
Environmental Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 241 or ENS 142 or STA 102
or STA 116 or STA 121 or MAT 122)
ENS342
Elements of GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS345
Air Photo-Interpretation (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 243)
ENS348
Analytical Methods in Environmental
		
Quality Assessment (3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or
ENS 241 or ENS 252)
Semester 6 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 301)
ENS312
Range Ecology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS314
Synoptic and Dynamic Climatology (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 ENS 241 or PMT 299)
ENS316
Geomorphological Techniques (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211 or GEO 111 or GEO 112
or CGB227)
ENS318
Water Resources Development and
		
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or
		
ENS 251 or ENH 330)
ENS319
Pedology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS344 Remote Sensing for Environmental
		
Scientists (3) (Pre-req ENS 243 or 		
CGB 211 or CGB 221)
Semester 7 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (3) )
ENS403 Environmental Hazards and Disaster
		
Management (3)
ENS413
Physical Climatology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 313 or ENS 314 or PMT 299
or PMT 321)
ENS415
Arid Lands Geomorphology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 315 or ENS 316)
ENS417
Hydrological Analysis (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS419
Soil Survey (3) (Pre-req ENS 319 or ENS 320)
ENS442

Advanced GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS 342 or

184

ENS447
		
ENS449
ENS457
		

CGB224 or CGB 416)
Environmental Quality Management
for Land & Air (3) (Pre-req ENS 348 or
BIO 111 or CHE 101 or ENH 211)
Land Reclamation (3)
Energy and Environment (3)
(Pre-req ENS 352 or ENS 353)

Semester 8 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS410
Special Topics in Environmental Science
(3) (NOT OFFERED IN 2019/2020)
ENS412
Methods & Techniques in Rangeland
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 311 or
		
ENS 312)
ENS414
Applied Climatology(3)
		
(Pre-req ENS313 or ENS314)
ENS416
Applied Geomorphology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 315 or ENS316)
ENS418
Applied Hydrology (3) (Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS421
Climates of Southern Africa (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS313 or ENS314)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis (3)
(Pre-req ENS344 or CGB224 or CGB416)
ENS448
Environmental Quality Management for
Waste and Waste Water (3)
		
Pre-req ENS348/ENH 211 or BIO 111 or
CHE 101
ENS458
Gender and Environment (3)
d) Minor-Major (Environmental Science as Minor)
programme.
In accordance with Academic General Regulation 00.62,
the Minor-Major (programme in physical environment
shall consist of 3 credits of optional courses, with
optional courses selected from the list provided for each
semester. Availability of courses is subject to the staffing
situation in the particular semester. Please confirm
registration with the Department.
Semester 5 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS311
Biogeography (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS313
General Climatology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or
ENS 241 or PMT 299)
ENS315
Process Geomorphology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS317
Principles of Hydrology (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211 )
ENS320
Principles of Soil Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Techniques in
		
Environmental Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 241 or ENS 142 or STA 102
or STA 116 or STA 121 or MAT 122)
ENS342
Elements of GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS345
Air Photo-Interpretation (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 243)
ENS348
Analytical Methods in Environmental
		
Quality Assessment (3) (Pre-reg 		
ENS 211 or ENS 241 or ENS 252 or BIO 111
or CHE 101 or ENH 211)
Semester 6 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 301)
ENS312
Range Ecology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
ENS314
Synoptic and Dynamic Climatology (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 241 or PMT 299)

ENS316
		
ENS318
		
		
ENS319
ENS343
		
ENS344
		

Geomorphological Techniques (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or GEO 111 or GEO 112
or CGB 222)
Water Resources Development and
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 211 or
ENS 251 or ENH 330)
Pedology (3) (Pre-req ENS 211)
Cartography and Map Analysis (3)
(Pre-req ENS 242)
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (3) (Pre-req ENS 243 or 		
CGB 211 or CGB 221)

Semester 7 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (3) )
ENS403 Environmental Hazards and Disaster
		
Management (3)
ENS413
Physical Climatology (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 313 & ENS 314 or PMT 299
or PMS 321)
ENS415
Arid Lands Geomorphology (3) (Pre-req
ENS315 or ENS316)(3)
ENS417
Hydrological Analysis (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS419
Soil Survey (3) (Pre-req ENS 319 or 		
ENS 320)
ENS442
Advanced GIS (3) (Pre-req ENS 342
or CGB224 or CGB416)
ENS447
Environmental Quality Management
		
for Land & Air (3) (Pre-req ENS 348 or
BIO 111 or CHE 101 or ENH 221)
ENS449
Land Reclamation (3)
ENS457
Energy and Environment(3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 353 or ENS 352)
Semester 8 Courses
Optional Courses
ENS412
Methods & Techniques in Rangeland
Management (3) (Pre-req ENS 311 or
ENS 312)
ENS414
Applied Climatology(3) (Pre-req ENS313
or ENS314)
ENS416
Applied Geomorphology (3)
(Pre-req ENS315 or ENS316)
ENS418
Applied Hydrology (3)
(Pre-req ENS 317)
ENS420
Applied Soil Science (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 320 or ENS 319)
ENS421
Climates of Southern Africa (3)
(Pre-req ENS3 13 or ENS 314)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography (3)
(Pre-req ENS 343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis (3)
(Pre-req ENS344 CGB224 or CGB416)
ENS448
Environmental Quality Management for
Waste and Waste Water (3)
Pre-req ENS348/BIO 111 or 		
CHE 101/ENH 221
ENS458
Gender and Environment (3)
ENS483
Research Essay (3)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2019/2020)
Human Environment Programme
The Human Environment programmes are designed for
Combined Major students registered in the Faculties
of Humanities and Social Sciences, and students from
these Faculties admitted to the Single Major programme,
subject to Department Regulations 5.1b, c, d, e & f.
Programme Courses
Level 100
ALL Courses at this level are CORE courses

Semester 1
ENS101
Introduction to Environmental Science:
Physical (3)
ENS141
Introductory Quantitative Techniques in
Environmental Science I (3)
Semester 2
ENS102
Introduction to Environmental Science:
		
Human (3) (Pre-reg ENS 101)
ENS142
Introductory Quantitative Techniques in
		
Environmental Science II (3)
		
(Pre-Req ENS141 or STA101 or 		
STA116 or MAT 122)
Level 200 Courses
In each of Semesters 3 and 4, Environmental Science
students must take a minimum of 9 credits core and
optional courses, and a minimum of 6 credits elective/
GEC courses.
Semester 3
Core Courses
ENS242
Introduction to Spatial Analysis (3)
Optional Course
ENS211
The Earth Environment System (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 101 or BIO 111 or CHE 101 or
PHY 122 or PHY 112)
ENS251
The Human Environment System (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 102 or BIO 111 or CHE 101
or PHY 112 or PHY 122)
Semester 4
Core Courses
ENS243
Introduction to Remote Sensing (3)
Optional Courses
ENS252
Botswana Environment (3)
ENS241
Quantitative Techniques in 		
Environmental Science (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 142 or STA 101 or STA 121
or STA 116 or STA 122 or MAT 122)
ENS260
Environment and Population 		
Dynamics (3) (Pre-req ENS 102 or 		
ENS 251)
Level 300 – 400 Courses
a) Single Major Programmes
In each of Semesters 5 to 8, in accordance with
Academic General Regulation 00.62, the Single Major
programme in Environmental Science shall consist of
12 credits core and optional courses for each of the
human environment areas of specialization, with 3
credits optional courses selected from the list of courses
provided in each semester. Availability of courses and
areas of specialization is subject to the staffing situation
in the particular semester and/or year. Please confirm
registration with the Department.
Areas of Specialization for Single Majors Only
Carreer Areas
1.Geo-Spatial Information Systems for Environmental
Science
2. Management of Natural Resources
3. Environmental and Social Impacts of Development
4. Environmental Hazards and Disaster Management
5. Management of the Urban
& Rural Environments

185

Semester 5
Core Courses (Single Majors Only)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS342 Elements of GIS (Career Area 1) (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS381
Introduction to Research Methods in
		
Environmental Science (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS241 or ENS 211 or ENS 251)
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Methods in Envi
ronmental Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 241 or ENS 142 or STA 102
or STA 116 or STA 121 or MAT 122)
ENS345
Air Photo-Interpretation (Career Area 1) (3)
(Pre-req ENS ENS 243)
ENS351
Agricultural Development and 		
Environment (Career Area 3) (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 252)
ENS353
Concepts and Principles of 		
Industrialization(3) (Pre-req ENS 251
or ECO 111)
ENS360
Concepts and Principles of Population
Geography(Career Area 3,4,5) (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 260 or ENS 251)
ENS362
Environment and Disease
		
(Career Area 3,4,5) (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 251, ENS 260 & ENH221
or ENH 211)
ENS365
Human Settlements and Environment
(Career Area 3,4,5 (3) (Pre-req ENS 251
or ENS 101)
ENS367
Principles and Practice in Tourism		
(Career Area 2) (3)			
(Pre-req ENS 251 or THM 101)
Semester 6
Core Courses
(Single Majors Only)
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
(Pre-req ENS 301)
ENS344
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (Career Area 1) (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 243 or CGB 211 or CGB 221)
ENS382
Project Proposal (3) (Pre-req ENS 381)
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS318
Water Resources Development & 		
Management(Career Area 2, 3) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251 or ENH 330)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS352
Globalization, Socio-Economic and 		
Environmental Change (Career Area 3) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 101 or ECO 111 or
ECO 112)
ENS361
Techniques in Population Geography
(Career Areas 3,4,5)(3) 			
(Pre-req ENS241or ENS 260 or ENS 360))
ENS363
Health Care Geography 		
(Career Area 5) (3) (Pre-req ENS 251
or ENS 362 or ENH 221 or ENH 211)
ENS364
Urban and Rural Survey Techniques
(Career Area 5) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS241 or ENS251)
ENS368
Methods and Techniques in Tourism
(Career Area 2) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 367 or THM 101)

ENS301
Semester 7
Core Courses
(Single Majors Only)
ENS404
Environmental Impact Assessment (3)
ENS481
Project Data Collection, Processing and
Analysis (3) (ENS382)
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (ALL) (3)
ENS403
Environmental Hazards and Disaster
Management (Career Area 3, 4) (3)
ENS441
Multivariate Quantitative
Techniques in Environmental Science (3)
(Pre-req ENS 341)
ENS442
Advanced GIS (Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req
ENS 342 CGB224 or CGB416)
ENS451
Rural Development Theory and Practice(
Career Area 5)(3)
ENS455
Industry and Environment 		
(Career Area 3) (3) (Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS457
Energy and Environment (Career Area 3)
(3) (Pre-reg ENS 351/ENS 352/ENS 353
ENS461
Advanced Techniques in Population
Geography (3) (Pre-req ENS 361)
ENS465
Urbanization and Environment(Career
Area 3, 5)(3)
ENS467
Ecotourism (Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req ENS
367 or ENS 368 or THM 101)
Semester 8
Core Courses (Single Majors Only)
ENS482
Project Report (3) Pre-req ENS 481)
Optional Courses (by Career Areas)
ENS402
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (Career Area 2)(3)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography (Career Area 1) (3)
(Pre-req ENS343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS344
or CGB224 or CGB 416)
ENS450
African Environment (CareerArea5) (3)
ENS452
Rural Development in Botswana
(Career Area 5) (3)
ENS454
Industrialization Trends in the 		
Developing World (Career Area 5)(3) )
(Pre-req ENS353)
ENS456
Transport and Environment
(Career Area 3) (3)(Pre-req ENS353)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (Career Area 3) (3)
ENS466
Urbanization in Developing Countries
(Career Area 5)(3)
ENS468
Tourism and Development		
(Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req ENS367
or ENS368 or THM101)
b) Major-Minor (ES Major) Programme
In semesters 5 to 8, in accordance with Academic
General Regulation 00.62, the Major-Minor programme
in Environmental Science shall consist of 6 or 9 credits
of optional courses, to make up a total of no more than
15 credits per academic year. The optional courses are
to be selected from the list of courses provided for each
semester. The Career areas specified above also apply
to this programme. Availability of courses and areas
of specialisation is subject to the staffing situation in
the particular semester and/or year. Please confirm
registration with the Department.
Semester 5
Core Courses

ENS342
		
ENS381
		
		

Contemporary Environmental Issues(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
Elements of GIS (Career Area 1) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 242)
Introduction to Research Methods in
Environmental Science(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 241 or ENS 251)

Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Methods in 		
Environmental Science (3)
(Pre-req ENS 241/ENS 142/STA102/		
STA116/STA121/\MAT 122)
ENS345
Air Photo-Interpretation
(Career Area 1)(3) (Pre-req ENS ENS 243)
ENS351
Agricultural Development and 		
Environment (Career Area 3)(3)
(Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 252)
ENS353
Concepts and Principles of 		
Industrialization (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251/ECO 111)
ENS360
Concepts and Principles of Population
Geography(Career Area 3,4,5) (3)
(Pre-req ENS260/ENS 251)
ENS362
Environment and Disease
(Career Area 3,4,5) (3) (Pre-req ENS251,
ENS260 or ENH221 or ENH 211)
ENS365
Human Settlements and Environment
(Career Area 3,4,5 (3) (Pre-req ENS251/
ENS101)
ENS367
Principles and Practice in 		
Tourism(Career Area 2) (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS251/TMH 101)
Semester 6
Core Courses
ENS344
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (Career Area 1) (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS243 or CGB 211 or CBG 221)
ENS 382 Project Proposal (3) Pre-req. ENS381
Optional Courses
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 301)
ENS318
Water Resources Development & 		
Management(Career Area 2, 3)
(3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251/ENH 330)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis
		
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS352
Globalization, Socio-Economic and 		
Environmental Change (Career Area 3) (3)
Pre-req ENS251/ENS101/ECO111/		
ECO112/SOC 121/ENS 252)
ENS361
Techniques in Population Geography
(Career Areas 3,4,5)(3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 241/ ENS 260/ENS 360)
ENS363
Health Care Geography 		
(Career Area 5) (3) (Pre-req ENS 251
or ENS 362 or/ENH 211/ ENH 221)
ENS364
Urban and Rural Survey Techniques
(Career Area 5) (3) (Pre-req ENS ENS 251/
ENS241)
ENS368
Methods and Techniques in Tourism
(Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req ENS 		
367/THM 101)
Semester 7
Core Courses
ENS 481 Project Data Collection, Processing 		
and Analysis (3) Pre-req ENS382
Optional Courses
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (ALL) (3)

186

ENS403
		
ENS441
		
ENS442
		
ENS451
		
ENS453
		
ENS455
ENS457
ENS461
		
ENS465
		
ENS467

Environmental Hazards and Disaster
Management (Career Area 3, 4) (3)
Multivariate Quantitative Techniques in
Environmental Science (3) (Pre-req ENS 341)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2019/2020)
Advanced GIS (Career Area 1) (3)
(Pre-req ENS342/CGB224/CGB416)
Rural Development Theory and Practice
(Career Area 5)(3)
Development Geography (3)
(Pre-req. ENS352)
Industry and Environment 		
(Career Area 3) (3) (Pre-req ENS353)
Energy and Environment (Career Area 3) (3)
(Pre-req. 352/353)
Advanced Techniques in Population
Geography (3) (Pre-req ENS 361)
Urbanization and Environment
(Career Area 3, 5)(3)
Ecotourism (Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req
ENS 367 or ENS 368 or THM 101)

Semester 8
Core Courses
ENS482
Project Report (3) Pre-req ENS 481
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS402
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (Career Area 2)(3)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography 			
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS344/CGB224/CGB416)
ENS450
African Environment 			
(Career Area 5) (3)
ENS452
Rural Development in Botswana
(Career Area 5) (3)
ENS454
Industrialization Trends in the 		
Developing World (Career Area 5) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS456
Transport and Environment 		
(Career Area 3) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (Career Area 3)(3)
ENS466
Urbanization in Developing Countries
(Career Area 5)(3)
ENS468
Tourism and Development		
(Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req ENS 367
or ENS 368 or THM 101)
c) Major-Major Programme
There are no core courses for the combined MajorMajor students. They shall take 6 credits of optional
Environmental Science courses in each of semesters 5
to 8. No areas of specialisation are prescribed under this
programme. However, candidates could use templates
for Single Majors or Major-Minors (ES major) to guide
their selection of courses. Availability of courses is
subject to the staffing situation in the particular
semester and/or year.
Semester 5
Optional Courses
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS342
Elements of GIS (Career Area 1) (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 242)
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Methods in 		
Environmental Science (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 241/ENS 142/STA102/		
STA116/STA121/MAT 122)

ENS345
ENS351
ENS353
ENS360
		
ENS362
		
ENS365
ENS367

Air Photo-Interpretation (Career Area 1)
(3) (Pre-req ENS ENS 243)
Agricultural Development and 		
Environment (Career Area 3)(3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 252)
Concepts and Principles of 		
Industrialization (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251/ ECO 111)
Concepts and Principles of Population
Geography(Career Area 3,4,5) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 260/ENS 251)
Environment and Disease
(Career Area 3,4,5) (3) (Pre-req ENS 251,
ENS 260 or ENH221 or ENH 211)
Human Settlements and Environment
(Career Area 3,4,5 (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 101)
Principles and Practice in Tourism		
(Career Area 2) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251/THM 101)

Semester 6
Optional Courses
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)
(Pre-req ENS 301)
ENS318
Water Resources Development & 		
Management(Career Area 2, 3)
(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251/ENH 330)
ENS343
Cartography and Map Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
ENS344
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (Career Area 1) (3) 		
(Pre-req NS 243/CGB211/CBG221)
ENS352
Globalization, Socio-Economic and 		
Environmental Change 			
(Career Area 3) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS251/ENS101/ECO111/		
EC112/SOC121ENS252)
ENS361
Techniques in Population Geography
(Career Areas 3,4,5)(3) (Pre-req ENS 241 /
ENS 260/ENS 360)
ENS 363 Health Care Geography (Career Area 5)
(3) (Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 362 or
ENH 221/ENH 211)
ENS 364 Urban and Rural Survey Techniques
(Career Area 5) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 241 ENS251)
ENS 368 Methods and Techniques in Tourism
(Career Area 2) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 367 or THM 101)
Semester 7
Optional Courses
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis 		
(ALL(3)
ENS403
Environmental Hazards and Disaster
		
Management (Career Area 3, 4) (3)
ENS441
Multivariate Quantitative Techniques in
Environmental Science (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 341)
ENS442
Advanced GIS (Career Area 1) (3) 		
(Pre-req CGB 224 or CGB 416 or ENS 342)
ENS451
Rural Development Theory and Practice
(Career Area 5)(3)
ENS453
Development Geography (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 352)
ENS455
Industry and Environment 		
(Career Area 3) (3) (Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS457
Energy and Environment (Career Area 3)
(3) (Pre-req ENS 352/ENS353)
ENS461
Advanced Techniques in Population
		
Geography (3) (Pre-req ENS 361)
ENS465
Urbanization and Environment(Career
Area 3, 5)(3)

(ENS467

Ecotourism (Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req ENS
367 or ENS 368 or THM 101)

Semester 8
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS402
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (Career Area 2)(3)
ENS410
Special Topics in Environmental Science
(ALL) (3)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2019/2020)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography 			
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS 343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 344/CGB 224/CBG 416)
ENS450
African Environment (Career Area 5 (3)
ENS452
Rural Development in Botswana
(Career Area 5) (3)
ENS454
Industrialization Trends in the 		
Developing World (Career Area 5)(3) )
(Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (Career Area 3) (3)
ENS466
Urbanization in Developing Countries
(Career Area 5)(3)
ENS468
Tourism and Development		
( Career Area 2) (3) (Pre-req ENS 367
or ENS 368 or THM 101)
d) Major-Minor (ES Minor) Programme
In the combined Major-Minor (with Environmental
Science as minor) programme, students shall take 3
credits of Environmental Science courses in each of
semesters 5 to 8. No areas of specialisation apply to this
programme. The availability of courses is subject to the
staffing situation in the particular semester.
Semester 5
Optional Courses
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues(3)
(Pre-req ENS 211 or ENS 251)
ENS342
Elements of GIS (Career Area 1) (3)
		
(Pre-req ENS 242)
Optional Courses by Career Area
ENS341
Advanced Quantitative Methods in 		
Environmental Science (3)
(Pre-req ENS241/ENS142/STA102/		
STA116/STA121/MAT122)
ENS345
Air Photo-Interpretation
(Career Area 1)(3) (Pre-req ENS ENS 243)
ENS351
Agricultural Development and 		
Environment (Career Area 3)(3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 251 or ENS 252)
ENS353
Concepts and Principles of 		
Industrialization (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251\ ECO111)
ENS360
Concepts and Principles of Population
Geography(Career Area 3,4,5) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 260/ENS 251)
ENS362
Environment and Disease
(Career Area 3,4,5) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251, ENS 260 or 		
ENH221/ENH 211)
ENS365
Human Settlements and
Environment (Career Area 3,4,5 (3)
(Pre-req ENS 251/ENS 101)
ENS367
Principles and Practice in Tourism		
(Career Area 2) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 251/THM 101)
Semester 6
Optional Courses
ENS302
Sustainable Development (3)

187

ENS318
ENS343
ENS344
ENS352

ENS361
ENS363
ENS364
ENS368

(Pre-req ENS 301)
Water Resources Development 		
& Management ( Career Area 2, 3) (3)
(Pre-req ENS211 or ENS 251/ ENH 330)
Cartography and Map Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS 242)
Remote Sensing for Environmental
Scientists (Career Area 1) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 243/CGB 211/CGB221)
Globalization, Socio-Economic and 		
Environmental Change (Career Area 3) (3)
(Pre-req ENS251/ENS101/ECO111/		
SOC121/ENS 252/ECO 112)
Techniques in Population Geography
(Career Areas 3,4,5) (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS241 / ENS260/ENS 360)
Health Care Geography 		
(Career Area 5) (3) (Pre-req ENS 251
or ENS 362 or ENH 221/ ENH 211)
Urban and Rural Survey Techniques
(Career Area 5) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 241 ENS251)
Methods and Techniques in Tourism
(Career Area 2) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 367/THM 101)

Semester 7
Optional Courses
ENS401
Environmental Policy Analysis (ALL) (3)
ENS403
Environmental Hazards and Disaster
Management (Career Area 3, 4) (3)
ENS441
Multivariate Quantitative Techniques in
Environmental Science (3)
(Pre-req ENS 341)
ENS442
Advanced GIS (Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req
ENS 342/CGB224/CGB 416)
ENS451
Rural Development Theory and Practice
(Career Area 5)(3)
ENS453
Development Geography (3) 		
(Pre-req ENS 352)
ENS455
Industry and Environment 		
(Career Area 3) (3) (Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS457
Energy and Environment (Career Area 3)
(3) (ENS352/353)
ENS461
Advanced Techniques in Population
Geography (3) (Pre-req ENS 361)
ENS465
Urbanization and Environment
(Career Area 3, 5)(3)
ENS467
Ecotourism (Career Area 2) (3)
ENS 367/ENS 368/THM 101
Semester 8
Optional Courses by Career Areas
ENS402
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (Career Area 2) (3)
ENS410
Special Topics in Environmental Science
(ALL) (3) (NOT OFFERED IN 2019/2020)
ENS443
Advanced Cartography 			
(Career Area 1) (3) (Pre-req ENS 343)
ENS444
Digital Image Processing and Analysis
(Career Area 1) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 344/CGB224/CGB 416)
ENS450
African Environment (Career Area 5) (3)
ENS452
Rural Development in Botswana
(Career Area 5) (3)
ENS454
Industrialization Trends in the 		
Developing World (Career Area 5) (3)
(Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS456
Transport and Environment 		
(Career Area 3) (3) (Pre-req ENS 353)
ENS458
Gender and Environment (Career Area 3) (3)
ENS466
Urbanization in Developing Countries
(Career Area 5)(3)

ENS468

Tourism and Development		
(Career Area 2) (3) 			
(Pre-req ENS 367 or ENS 368 or 		
THM 101)

DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY
Programmes and Titles of Degrees

The Department of Geology offers the following
Programmes leading to the award of the mentioned
Degrees:
• Single Major Programme, leading to the award of
a Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology as per
Departmental Regulation 2.2
• Combined Major/Minor with a Geology major leading
to the award a Bachelor of Science degree as per
Departmental Regulation 2.2
• Combined Major/Major Degree Programme with
Geology and one of Chemistry, Environmental
Science and Physics leading to the award of a
Bachelor of Science Degree as per Departmental
Regulations 2.2
• Combined Major/Minor with Geology as a Minor
leading to the award of the degree in which the
student is enrolled as per Departmental Regulation
2.2
• Single Major Programme (in collaboration with the
Department of Physics), leading to the award of a
Bachelor of Science Degree in Applied Geophysics as
per in the Faculty of Science Regulations 23.2.1 and
23.4.
• Master of Science Programme leading to the award of
a Master of Science Degree in Hydrogeology as per
Departmental Regulation 4.0.
• MPhil and PhD degree programme in Geology in
accordance with General Regulation 50.1 and 50.2f
for the degrees of Master of Philosophy (MPhil) and
Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) (UB Graduate Calendar
2019/2020)
Entry Requirements
(a) Admission to the Geology Single Major and Combined
Degree Programmes shall be as specified in the Faculty
of Science Regulations 23.2.1 and 23.4.
(b) Students who wish to register for Geology (Single
Major or Combined Degree) at Level 200 must have
taken and passed Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry and
Geology at Level 100.
(c) A student admitted to Level 200 Geology who has
successfully completed Level 100 Geology courses must
comply with the University of Botswana Academic
General Regulation 00.311 by taking relevant General
Education courses or Elective courses in consultation
with the Head of Department.
Award of the Degree
To be awarded a Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology
or a Bachelor of Science for a Combined Degree
involving Geology as a subject, a student must have
taken and passed the relevant courses prescribed in
sections 3.1 and 3.2 and must satisfy General Academic
Regulations 00.85 and 00.9 and Faculty of Science
Special Regulation 23.7.
Course Structure
Geology courses shall be offered at Levels 100 to 400
for the Undergraduate Programme as outlined in

Regulations 2.1 to 2.4 below and Levels 600 to 700 for
Master of Science candidates

GEO301

COMMON FIRST YEAR PROGRAMME FOR ALL GEOLOGY
DEGREE PROGRAMMES INCLUDING APPLIED
GEOPHYSICS PROGRAMME
Semester 1
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4 credits)
COM141 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3 credits)
GEO111
General Geology I (3 credits)
ICT121
Computing Skills Fundamentals 1 (2
credits)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4 credits)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics,
Vibrations and Waves (4 credits)

Semester 5
Core Courses
GEO302 Igneous Petrology (3 credits (Pre-req
GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO303 Sedimentary Petrology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO305 Ore Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO202 &
GEO206)
GEO306 Exploration Geophysics 1 (3 credits) (Prereq GEO201, MAT291 & MAT292)
GEO317 Computer Applications to Geology (3
credits) ((Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)

Service Courses (For non Geology Majors)
GEO103
GEO104

Geology for Teachers (3 credits)
Introduction to Geology for 		
Mining Engineers (3 credits)

General Education Courses
GEC250 Earth Processes, Mineral Resources and
Development (2 credits)
GEC251
Groundwater and Society (2 credits)
Semester 2
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4 credits) (Pre-req
CHE101)
COM142 Academic and Professional Communica
tion (Science) (3 credits)
GEO112
Introduction to Geology II (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111)
ICT122
Computing Skills Fundamentals 2 (2
credits)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4 credits)
(Pre-req MAT111)
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
Modern Physics (3 credits)

Field Mapping (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)

Semester 6
GEO304 Advanced Structural Geology (4 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201)
GEO308 Metamorphic Petrology (3 credits) (Prereq GEO202 & GEO303)
GEO309 Hydrogeology (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO205)
GEO310
Exploration Geophysics II (3 credits) (Prereq GEO306, MAT291 & MAT292)
GEO319 Introduction to Geochemistry (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO302)
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO407 Economic Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305)
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits) (Prereq GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111, GEO112 &
GEO201)
GEO413 Research Project for Single Majors I (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO301 & GEO317)
Optional Course
GEO410
Advanced Exploration Geophysics (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO306 & GEO310)

GEOLOGY AS SINGLE MAJOR PROGRAMME
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201 Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO205 Hydrogeology (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111
& GEO112)
GEO211
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO316 Introduction to Sedimentology and Stra
tigraphy (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)
STA116
Basic Statistics (3 credits)
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics I (3 credits)
(Pre-req MAT111 &MAT112)
Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO202 Optical Mineralogy (3 credits) 		
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO203 Remote Sensing Applied to Geology
(3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO206 Petrography (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics II (3 credits)
(Pre-req MAT111 &MAT112)
WINTER SEMESTER

188

Semester 8
Core Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO201; GEO203)
GEO412 Mineral Exploration (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305 & GEO407)
GEO414 Research Project for Single Majors II
(3 credits) (Pre-req GEO413)
GEOLOGY MAJOR/MAJOR PROGRAMME- with
CHEMISTRY
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201 Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO205 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO211
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO316 Introduction to Sedimentology and Stra
tigraphy (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)
Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO202 Optical Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO203 Remote Sensing Applied to Geology (3

GEO206

credits) (Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
Petrography (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)

WINTER SEMESTER
GEO301

Field Mapping (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)

Semester 5
Core Courses
GEO302 Igneous Petrology (3 credits )
(Pre-req GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO305 Ore Geology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO202 & GEO206)
Semester 6
GEO308 Metamorphic Petrology (3 credits) 		
(Pre-req GEO202 & GEO303)
GEO319 Introduction to Geochemistry (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO302)
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO407 Economic Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305)
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111, GEO112 &
GEO201)
Semester 8
Core Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO201 & GEO203)
GEO406 Research Project for Combined Majors (3
credits) (Pre-requisite GEO301)
GEO412 Mineral Exploration (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305 & GEO407)
GEOLOGY MAJOR/MAJOR PROGRAMME-WITH
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201 Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO205 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO211
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO203 Remote Sensing Applied to Geology
(3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO206 Petrography (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
WINTER SEMESTER
GEO301

Field Mapping (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201 & GEO206)

Semester 5
Core Courses
GEO302 Igneous Petrology (3 credits (Pre-req
GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO305 Ore Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO202
& GEO206)
Semester 6
GEO308 Metamorphic Petrology (3 credits) (Pre-

GEO309

req GEO202 & GEO303)
Hydrogeology (3credits) 		
(Pre-req GEO205)

Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO407 Economic Geology (3 credits) 		
(Pre-req GEO305)
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO1111 & GEO112)
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111, GEO112 &
GEO201)
Semester 8
Core Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO201 & GEO203)
GEO406 Research Project for Combined Majors (3
credits) (Pre-requisite GEO301)
GEO412 Mineral Exploration (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305 & GEO407)

Semester 8
Core Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO201 & GEO203)
GEO406 Research Project for Combined Majors (3
credits) (Pre-requisite GEO301)
GEOLOGY MAJOR (MINOR CHEMISTRY,
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND PHYSICS) IN
COMBINED DEGREE
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201
GEO205
GEO211
GEO316

Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
Introduction to Sedimentology and Stra
tigraphy (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)

GEOLOGY MAJOR/MAJOR PROGRAMME-with PHYSICS
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201 Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO205 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO211
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)

Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO202 Optical Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO203 Remote Sensing Applied to Geology (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO206 Petrography (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
WINTER SEMESTER

Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO203 Remote Sensing Applied to Geology
(3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO206 Petrography (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
WINTER SEMESTER
GEO301 Field Mapping (3 credits)
		
(Pre-req GEO201 & GEO206)
Semester 5
Core Courses
GEO302 Igneous Petrology (3 credits (Pre-req
GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO303 Sedimentary Petrology (3 credits)
(Pre-req. GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO306 Exploration Geophysics 1 (3 credits)
(Pre-req. GEO201, MAT291 & MAT292)
Semester 6
GEO308 Metamorphic Petrology (3 credits) (Prereq GEO202 & GEO203)
GEO309 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO205)
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO407 Economic Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305)
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits) (Prereq GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa
(3 credits) (Pre-req Pre-req GEO111,
GEO112 and GEO201)

189

GEO301

Field Mapping (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201 & GEO206)

Semester 5
Core Courses
GEO302 Igneous Petrology (3 credits (Pre-req
GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO305 Ore Geology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO202 & GEO206)
GEO306 Exploration Geophysics 1 (3 credits) (Prereq GEO201, MAT291 & MAT292)
GEO317 Computer Applications to Geology 		
(3 credits)
Semester 6
GEO304 Advanced Structural Geology (4 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201)
GEO308 Metamorphic Petrology (3 credits)
GEO309 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
GEO319 Introduction to Geochemistry (3 credits)
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits)
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111, GEO112 &
GEO201)
GEO413 Research Project for Single Majors I (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO301 & GEO317)
Semester 8
Core Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO206)
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO201 & GEO203)
GEO412 Mineral Exploration (3 credits) (Pre-req

GEO414

GEO305 & GEO407)
Research Project for Single Majors II (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO413)

GEOLOGY MINOR SUBJECT IN COMBINED DEGREE
(MAJOR CHEMISTRY, ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND
PHYSICS)
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201 Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO205 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO211
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO316 Introduction to Sedimentology and Stra
tigraphy (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)
Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO206 Petrography (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
WINTER SEMESTER
GEO301 Field Mapping (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201 & GEO206)
Semester 5
Core Courses
GEO305

Ore Geology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO202 & GEO206)

Semester 6 (None)
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits) (Prereq GEO111 & GEO112)
BSc 201-APPLIED GEOPHYSICS PROGRAMME
Entry Requirements
(a) Admission to the Applied Geophysics Degree
Programmes shall be as specified in the Faculty of
Science Regulations 23.2.1 and 23.4.
(b) Students who wish to register for Applied Geophysics
at Level 200 must have taken and passed Mathematics,
Physics, Chemistry and Geology at Level 100.
(c) A student admitted to Level 200 Applied Geophysics
who has successfully completed Level 100 Geology
courses must comply with the University of Botswana
Academic General Regulation 00.311 by taking
relevant General Education courses or Elective courses
in consultation with the Head of Department.
Award of Degree
To be awarded a Bachelor of Science Degree in Applied
Geophysics a candidate must have taken and passed
the relevant courses prescribed in section 9 and must
satisfy General Academic Regulations 00.85 and 00.9
and Faculty of Science Special Regulation 23.7.
Programme Structure
The Programme is designed in such a manner as to
gradually introduce students to the principles of Applied
Geophysics in the third year. It is envisaged that at this
level, students are sufficiently grounded in the basic
theories and principles used in Geophysics and can
appreciate all the scientific/practical developments

in this field they are likely to encounter. They should
have been exposed to adequate field work through the
geologic field course taken during Level 100 and 200.
The fourth and final year consists of the completion
of the Geology and Applied Geophysics courses and
emphasis is placed on application of the various
geophysical methods in exploration and fieldwork
(where the students will be acquainted with the use of
various geophysical equipment) which forms a major
component of the course.
The courses are also designed to satisfy the required
training expected for an applied geophysicist. This will
enable graduates of the programme to qualify to be
members of professional societies such as the Society of
Exploration Geophysicists (SEG).
In the final year students will have the option of choosing
either the Mining Geophysics or the Environmental
Geophysics Stream, the latter including geotechnical and
groundwater studies.

Semester 4
Core Courses
GEO206 Petrography (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111 & GEO112)
MAT222 Calculus II (3 credits) (Pre-req MAT111
& MAT112)
PHY232 Properties of Matter, Basic
Thermodynamics and Introduction to
Nuclear Physics (3 Credits) (Pre-req PHY112)
PHY241
Electricity and Magnetism
(3 credits) (Pre-req PHY112)
PHY249 Physics Practical 4.1 (1 credits)
(Pre-req PHY112)
Optional Courses
GEO203 Remote Sensing and GIS 		
Applied to Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
MAT242 Computing I (3 credits)
MAT244 Numerical Methods (3 Credits)
PHY222 Electronics and Nuclear Physics (3 credits)
WINTER SEMESTER

Semester 1
CHE101
General Chemistry I (4 credits)
COM141 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3 credits)
GEO111
General Geology (3 credits)
ICT121
Computing Skills Fundamentals 1 (2credits)
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4 credits)
PHY112
Geometrical Optics and Mechanics,
Vibrations and Waves (4 credits)
Service Courses
Semester 2
CHE102
General Chemistry II (4 credits) (Pre-req
CHE101)
COM142 Academic and Professional Communication
(Science) (3 credits)
GEO112
Physical Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111)
ICT122
Computing Skills Fundamentals 2 (2 credits)
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4 credits)
(Pre-req MAT111)
PHY122 Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
Modern Physics (3 credits)
Semester 3
Core Courses
GEO201 Structural Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO211
Basic Mineralogy (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO316 Introduction to Sedimentology and Stra
tigraphy (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO111 &
GEO112)
GPH201 Fundamentals of Geophysics (3 credits)
(MAT111, MAT112, PHY111, PHY121; Coreq MAT221)
MAT221 Calculus I (3 credits) (Pre-req MAT111
&MAT112)
Optional Courses
GEO205 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO111& GEO112)
PHY231
Mechanics and Physical Optics (3 credits)
PHY239 Physics Practical’s 2.1 (1 Credit)
Notes: Candidates intending to take Environmental
Geophysics at level 400 are advised to take GEO205 as
one of the optional courses.

190

GEO301

Field Mapping (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201 & GEO206)

Semester 5
Core Courses
CCB313
Surveying (3 credits)
GPH301 Gravity and Magnetic Methods
(3 credits) (MAT221, MAT222, GEO201)
(Co-req CCB313)
PHY353 Mathematical Methods for Physical
Sciences (3 credits)
Optional Courses
GEO304 Advanced Structural Geology (4 credits)
(Pre-req GEO201)
GEO305 Ore Geology (3 credits) ((Pre-req GEO202)
MAT324 Different ial Equations (3 credits)
PHY315
Introduction to Potential Fields
Geophysics (3 credits)
PHY354 Advanced Electronics I (3 credits)
Semester 6
GPH302 Electrical and electromagnetic Methods
(3 credits) (Pre-req MAT221, MAT222,
PHY221, GEO201
GPH304

GPH306

Seismic Imaging: Theory
and Applications (3 credits)
(Pre-req MAT221, MAT222, 		
GEO201; Co-req CCB313)
Geophysical Data Analysis and
Interpretation (3 credits) (Pre-req 		
MAT221, MAT222, GPH301)
(Co-req GPH302, GPH304)

Optional Courses
GEO309 Hydrogeology (3 credits)
(Pre-req GEO205)
PHY361
Introduction to Electromagnetism
(3 credits) (Pre-req PHY241)
PHY364 Advanced Electronics II (3 credits)
(Pre-req. PHY354)
PHY476 Mathematical Methods for Physical
Sciences (3 credits) (Pre-req PHY353)
Electives
Candidates are also advised to take the following courses
or any other 3 credit course of their choice as an elective

ENV312
Sustainable Development (3 credits)
WINTER SEMESTER
GPH307

Geophysical Field School (3 weeks) (3
credits) (Pre-req MAT221, MAT222, 		
GEO301, GHP301, GPH302, GPH 304)

GPH404

Environmental Geophysics
(3 credits) (Pre-req GPH301; GPH304)
GPH406 Mining Geophysics (3 credits) (Pre-req
GPH301; GPH304)
GPH407 Global Geophysics (3 credits) (Pre-req
MAT221, MAT222)
PHY481Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics (3 credits)

MNING GEOPHYSICS STREAM
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO407 Economic Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305)
GPH401 Research Project I (3 credits) (Pre-req
GPH307)
GPH403 Seismic Data Processing and Interpretation
(3 credits) (Pre-req MAT221, MAT222,
GPH306)
GPH405 Well Logging and Formation Evaluation
(3 credits) (Pre-req GPH304; GEO316)
Optional Course
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits) ((Prereq GEO111 & GEO112)
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111, GEO112 &
GEO201)
GPH404 Environmental Geophysics
(3 credits) (Pre-req GPH301; GPH304)
GPH407 Global Geophysics (3 credits) (Pre-req
MAT221, MAT222)
PHY481
Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics (3
credits)
Semester 8
Core Course
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO203 & GEO203)
GPH402 Geophysical Time Series (3 credits) (Prereq GPH304, GPH306)
GPH406 Mining Geophysics (3 credits) (Pre-req
GPH301; GPH304)
GPH412 Research Project II (3 credits) (Pre-req
GPH401)
Optional Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO206
& GEO206)
PHY485 Microcomputing for Physical Sciences (3
credits)
In addition candidates are required to take 3 credits of
Electives/GEC
ENVIRONMENTAL GEOPHYSICS STREAM
Semester 7
Core Courses
GEO408 Environmental Geology (3 credits) (Prereq GEO111 & GEO112)
GPH401 Research Project I (3 credits) (Pre-req
GPH307)
GPH403 Seismic Data Processing and Interpreta
tion (3 credits) (Pre-req MAT221,
MAT222, GPH306)
GPH405 Well Logging and Formation Evaluation
(3credits) (Pre-req GPH304; GEO316)
Optional Course
GEO407 Economic Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO305)
GEO411
Regional Geology of Southern Africa (3
credits) (Pre-req GEO111, GEO112 &
GEO201)

Semester 8
Core Course
GEO405 Engineering Geology (3 credits) (Pre-req
GEO201 & GEO203)
GPH402 Geophysical Time Series (3 credits) (Prereq GPH304, GPH306)
GPH404 Environmental Geophysics (3 credits)
(Pre-req GPH301; GPH304)
GPH412 Research Project II (3 credits) (Pre-req
GPH401)
Optional Course
GEO402 Geotectonics (3 credits) (Pre-req GEO201
& GEO201)
GPH407 Global Geophysics (3 credits) (Pre-req
MAT221, MAT222)
PHY485 Microcomputing for Physical Sciences (3
credits)
In addition candidates are required to take 3 credits of
Electives/GEC

DEPARTMENT OF
MATHEMATICS
Programmes and Titles of Degrees
The Department of Mathematics offers the following
Programmes leading to the award of the mentioned
degrees:
• Single Major Programme leading to the award of
a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics as
outlined in Departmental Regulation 2.1
• Combined Major/Minor Programme with Mathematics
as the Major, leading to the award of a Bachelor
of Science Degree as outlined in Departmental
Regulation 2.2
• Combined Major/Major Programme leading to the
award of a Bachelor of Science Degree as outlined
Departmental Regulation 2.3
• Combined Major/Minor Programme with Mathematics
as the Minor leading to the award of a Bachelor
of Science Degree as outlined in Departmental
Regulation 2.4.
• BSc Mathematics of Finance
(a)

Admission into the Bachelor of Mathematics of
Finance programme shall be as stipulated in the
General Regulations of Faculty of Science.

(b)

Admission into level 100 of the Bachelor of Science
of Mathematics of Finance Degree programme
shall be as stipulated in the General Admission
Regulations.
Applicants in possession of O’ level- or BGCSE
qualification with at least B grades in mathematics
and a minimum grade C in English may be admitted
directly into level 100 of the degree programme.

(c)

(d)

Applicants who are in possession of an appropriate
Diploma in Mathematics of Finance or equivalent
may be admitted directly into Level 200 of the
Degree programme.

191

Entry Requirements
Admission to the Mathematics Programmes shall be as
specified in Faculty of Science Regulation 23.21.
The entry requirement for Single Major and Major/Minor
(with Mathematics Major) at level 300 shall be a GPA of
3.0 in the Mathematics courses at levels 100 and 200
subject to approval by the Head of the Department.
Single Major (Mathematics Major)
Level 100
Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I
(4, Pre-req. O-Level Credit in 		
Mathematics)
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4, Pre-req.
Taken MAT111)
Level 200
Semester 3
In Semester 3, the Single Major Programme shall consist
of 6 credits of core courses and a minimum of 6 credits
optional courses.
Core Courses
MAT211
Introductory Set and Number Theory
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths. or
equivalent)
MAT221 Calculus I (3, Pre-req. MAT122, A-Level
Maths. or equivalent)
Optional Courses
MAT244 Numerical Methods I 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT271 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122
Semester 4
Core Courses
In Semester 4, the Single Major Programme shall consist
of 6 credits of core courses and a minimum of 6 credits
of optional courses.
MAT212
MAT222
MAT214
MAT242
MAT252

Introduction to Linear Algebra		
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths. or
equivalent)
Calculus II (3, Pre-req. MAT221)
Optional Courses
Discrete Mathematics 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT111)
Computing (3, Pre-req. GEC121 and GEC122)
Newtonian Mechanics (3, Pre-req. MAT251)

Level 300
Semester 5
In Semester 5, the Single Major Programme shall consist
of 6 credits of core courses.
Additional minimum 6 credits should be taken from
optional courses in accordance with General Regulation
00.62.
Core Courses
MAT311
Abstract Algebra I(3, Pre-req. MAT211)
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3, Pre-req. MAT222)

Optional Courses
MAT323 Vector Calculus (3, Pre-req. MAT222)
MAT344 Numerical Methods for Linear Algebra
(3, Pre-eq. MAT212)
MAT361 Mathematical Programming and 		
Game Theory 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT221 and MAT222)
MAT371 Mathematical Statistics I 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT271)
Semester 6
In Semester 6, the Single Major Programme shall consist
of 9 credits of core courses. An additional minimum
3 credits should be taken from optional courses in
accordance with General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
MAT312 Abstract Algebra II (3, Pre-req. MAT311)
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3, Pre-req. MAT321)
MAT324 Differential Equations 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT222 or MAT382)
Optional Courses
MAT346 Numerical Methods II 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT244 or MAT344)
MAT348 Introduction to Computational 		
Mathematics (3, Pre-req. MAT242 		
and MAT344)
MAT352 Dynamics I (3, Pre-req. MAT252)
MAT372 Mathematical Statistics II		
(3, Pre-req. MAT371
Level 400
Semester 7
In Semester 7, the Single Major Programme shall consist
of 7 credits of core courses. Additional minimum 6 credits
should be taken from optional courses in accordance
with General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
MAT401 Introduction to Mathematical Writing (1)
MAT411
Linear Algebra (3, Pre-req. MAT212)
MAT421 Functions of a Complex Variable
(3, Pre- req. MAT321)
Optional Courses
MAT423 Mathematical Methods			
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
MAT425 Measure Theory			
(3, Pre-req. MAT322)
MAT431 General Topology (3, Pre-req. MAT322)
MAT451 Dynamics II (3, Pre-req. MAT352)
MAT461 Optimisation and Control Theory		
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
MAT471 Multivariate Statistics (3, Pre-req. MAT372)
Semester 8
In Semester 8, the Single Major Programme shall consist
of 3 credits of core course and a minimum of 9 credits of
optional courses in accordance with General Regulation
00.62.

MAT424
MAT426
MAT428
MAT432
MAT454
MAT464
MAT472
MAT474
MAT478

Dynamical Systems (3, Pre-req. MAT324)
Partial Differential Equations		
(3, Pre-req. MAT423)
Introduction to Probability Theory		
(3, Pre-req. MAT425)
Algebraic Topology (3, Pre-req. MAT431)
Introduction to Fluid Dynamics 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT323)
Introduction to Mathematical Modelling
Applied to Life Sciences 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
Linear Models (3, Pre-req. MAT471)
Stochastic Processes (3, Pre-req. MAT371)
Introduction to Statistical Analysis 		
of Reliability (3, Pre-req. MAT372)

Combined Major/Minor Programme (Mathematics Major)
Level 100
Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I		
(4, Pre-req. O-Level Credit 		
in Mathematics)
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4, Pre-req.
Taken MAT111)
Level 200
Semester 3
In Semester 3, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of core courses and 3 credits
from optional courses.
Core Courses
MAT211
Introductory Set and Number Theory
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths.
or equivalent)
MAT221 Calculus I (3, Pre-req. MAT122, 		
A-Level Maths. or equivalent)
Optional Courses
MAT244 Numerical Methods I (3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT271 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
Semester 4
In Semester 4 the Combined Major/Minor Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of core courses and 3 credits
from optional courses.
Core Courses
MAT212 Introduction to Linear Algebra 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths.
or equivalent)
MAT222 Calculus II (3, Pre-req. MAT221)

Core Courses
MAT406Project (3, Pre-req. MAT401)

Optional Courses
MAT214 Discrete Mathematics (3, Pre-req. MAT111)
MAT242 Computing(3, Pre-req. GEC121 and GEC122)
MAT252 Newtonian Mechanics (3, Pre-req. MAT251)

Optional Courses
MAT404 Topics in Advanced Mathematics 		
(3, Pre-req. Student must be a 		
fourth year Maths major)
MAT412 Number Theory (3, Pre-req. MAT311)
MAT414 Combinatorics and Graph Theory 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT211)
MAT416 Abstract Algebra III (3, Pre-req. MAT312)
MAT422 Functional Analysis (3, Pre-req. MAT322)

Level 300
Semester 5
In Semester 5, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of core courses. Additional
minimum 6 credits should be taken from optional
courses.
Core Courses
MAT311
Abstract Algebra I (3, Pre-req. MAT211)
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3, Pre-req. MAT222)

192

Optional Courses
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT271 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT323 Vector Calculus (3, Pre-req. MAT222)
MAT344 Numerical Methods for Linear Algebra
(3, Pre-eq. MAT212)
MAT361 Mathematical Programming and Game
Theory
(3, Pre-req. MAT221 and MAT222)
MAT371 Mathematical Statistics I 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT271)
Semester 6
In Semester 6, the Combined Major/ Minor Programme
shall consist of 3 credits of core courses. Additional
minimum 6 credits should be taken from optional
courses.
Core Courses
MAT324 Differential Equations 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT222 or MAT382)
Optional Courses
MAT312 Abstract Algebra II (3, Pre-req. MAT311)
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3, Pre-req. MAT321)
MAT346 Numerical Methods II 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT244 or MAT344)
MAT348 Introduction to Computational 		
Mathematics (3, Pre-req. MAT242 		
and MAT344)
MAT352 Dynamics I (3, Pre-req. MAT252)
MAT372 Mathematical Statistics II		
(3, Pre-req. MAT371)
Level 400
Semester 7
In Semester 7, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
shall consist of 4 credits of core courses. Additional
minimum 6 credits should be taken from optional
courses.
Core Courses
MAT401 Introduction to Mathematical Writing (1)
MAT421 Functions of a Complex Variable		
(3, Pre-req. MAT321)
Optional Courses
MAT411
Linear Algebra (3, Pre-req. MAT212)
MAT423 Mathematical Methods 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
MAT425 Measure Theory (3, Pre-req. MAT322)
MAT431 General Topology (3, Pre-req. MAT322)
MAT451 Dynamics II (3, Pre-req. MAT352)
MAT461 Optimisation and Control Theory 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
MAT471 Multivariate Statistics			
(3, Pre-req. MAT372
Semester 8
In Semester 8, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
shall consist of 3 credits of core course 9 credits of
optional courses.
Core course
MAT406 Project (3, Pre-req. MAT401)
Optional Courses
MAT402 History of Mathematics 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT412 Number Theory (3, Pre-req. MAT311)
MAT414 Combinatorics and Graph Theory 		

MAT416
MAT422
MAT424
MAT426
MAT428
MAT432
MAT454
MAT464
MAT472
MAT474
MAT478

(3, Pre-req. MAT211)
Abstract Algebra III 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT312)
Functional Analysis			
(3, Pre-req. MAT322)
Dynamical Systems			
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
Partial Differential Equations 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT423)
Introduction to Probability Theory 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT425)
Algebraic Topology (3, Pre-req. MAT431)
Introduction to Fluid Dynamics 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT323)
Introduction to Mathematical Modelling
Applied to Life Sciences 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
Linear Models (3, Pre-req. MAT471)
Stochastic Processes (3, Pre-req. MAT371)
Introduction to Statistical Analysis 		
of Reliability (3, Pre-req. MAT372)

Combined Major/Major Programme
Level 100
Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I (4, Pre-req.
O-Level Credit in Mathematics)
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II (4, Pre-req.
Taken MAT111)
Level 200
Semester 3
In Semester 3, the Combined Major/Major Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of core courses. Additional
credits may be taken from optional courses in accordance
with General Regulation 00.62
Core Courses
MAT211
Introductory Set and Number Theory
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths.
or equivalent)
MAT221 Calculus I
(3, Pre-req. MAT122, A-Level Maths. or
equivalent)
Optional Courses
MAT244 Numerical Methods I 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT271 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
Semester 4
In Semester 4, the Combined Major/Major Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of core courses. Additional
credits may be taken from optional courses in accordance
with General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
MAT212 Introduction to Linear Algebra 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths.
or equivalent)
MAT222 Calculus II (3, Pre-req. MAT221)
Optional Courses
MAT214 Discrete Mathematics 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT111)
MAT242 Computing (3, Pre-req. GEC121 and GEC122)
MAT252 Newtonian Mechanics (3, Pre-req. MAT251)

Level 300
Semester 5
In Semester 5, the Combined Major/Major Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of core courses. Additional
minimum 3 credits should be taken from optional
courses in accordance with General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
MAT311
Abstract Algebra I (3, Pre-req. MAT211)
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3, Pre-req. MAT222)
Optional Courses
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT323 Vector Calculus (3, Pre-req. MAT222)
MAT344 Numerical Methods for Linear Algebra
(3, Pre-eq. MAT212)
Semester 6
In Semester 6, the Combined Major/Major Programme
shall consist of 3 credits of core courses. Additional
minimum 3 credits should be taken from optional
courses in accordance with General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
MAT324 Differential Equations 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT222 or MAT382)

MAT416
MAT422
MAT428
MAT464

(3, Pre-req. MAT211)
Abstract Algebra III (3, Pre-req. MAT312)
Functional Analysis (3, Pre-req. MAT322)
Introduction to Probability Theory 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT425)
Introduction to Mathematical Modelling
Applied to Life Sciences
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)

Combined Major/Minor Programme
(Mathematics Minor)
Level 100
Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I 		
(4, Pre-req. O-Level Credit 		
in Mathematics)
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II 		
(4, Pre-req. Taken MAT111)
Level 200
Semester 3
In Semester 3, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
with Mathematics as Minor shall consist of 6 credits of
core courses.

Optional Courses
MAT252 Newtonian Mechanics 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT251)
MAT312 Abstract Algebra II (3, Pre-req. MAT311)
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3, Pre-req. MAT321)
MAT346 Numerical Methods II 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT244 or MAT344)
MAT348 Introduction to Computational 		
Mathematics (3, Pre-req. MAT242 		
and MAT344)
MAT352 Dynamics I (3, Pre-req. MAT252)

Core Courses
MAT211
Introductory Set and Number Theory
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths. or
equivalent)
MAT221 Calculus I (3, Pre-req. MAT122, A-Level
Maths. or equivalent)

Level 400
Semester 7
IIn Semester 7, the Combined Major/Major Programme
shall consist of 3 credits of core courses. Additional
minimum 6 credits should be taken from optional
courses in accordance with General Regulation 00.62.

Core Courses
MAT212 Introduction to Linear Algebra 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT111, A-Level Maths. or
equivalent)
MAT222 Calculus II (3, Pre-req. MAT221)
Level 300
Semester 5
In Semester 5, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
with Mathematics as Minor shall consist of 6 credits of
optional courses.

Core Courses
MAT421 Functions of a Complex Variable 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT321)
Optional Courses
MAT361 Mathematical Programming and Game
Theory (3, Pre-req. MAT221 and MAT222)
MAT371 Mathematical Statistics I 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT271)
MAT401 Introduction to Mathematical Writing (1)
MAT411
Linear Algebra (3, Pre-req. MAT212)
MAT423 Mathematical Methods 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT324)
MAT425 Measure Theory (3, Pre-req. MAT322)
MAT431 General Topology (3, Pre-req. MAT322)

Semester 4
In Semester 4, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
with Mathematics as Minor shall consist of 6 credits of
core courses.

Optional Courses
MAT251 Vectors and Introductory Mechanics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT271 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT311
Abstract Algebra I (3, Pre-req. MAT211)
MAT323 Vector Calculus (3, Pre-req. MAT222)
MAT344 Numerical Methods for Linear Algebra
(3, Pre-eq. MAT212)

Semester 8
In Semester 8, the Combined Major/Major Programme
shall consist of 6 credits of optional courses.

Semester 6
In Semester 6, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
with Mathematics as Minor shall consist of 6 credits of
optional courses.

Optional Courses
MAT372 Mathematical Statistics II		
(3, Pre-req. MAT371)
MAT402 History of Mathematics			
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT406 Project (3, Pre-req. MAT401)
MAT414 Combinatorics and Graph Theory 		

Optional Courses
MAT252 Newtonian Mechanics			
(3, Pre-req. MAT251)
MAT312 Abstract Algebra II			
(3, Pre-req. MAT311)
MAT346 Numerical Methods II 			

193

MAT348

(3, Pre-req. MAT244 or MAT344)
Introduction to Computational 		
Mathematics (3, Pre-req. MAT242 and
MAT344)

MAT271
FIN200
ECO211

Level 400
Semester 7
In Semester 7, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
with Mathematics as Minor shall consist of 3 credits of
optional courses.
Optional Courses
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3, Pre-req. MAT222)
MAT361 Mathematical Programming and 		
Game Theory (3, Pre-req. MAT221 		
and MAT222)
MAT371 Mathematical Statistics I 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT271)
MAT411
Linear Algebra (3, Pre-req. MAT212)
Semester 8
In Semester 8, the Combined Major/Minor Programme
with Mathematics as Minor shall consist of 6 credits of
optional courses.
Optional Courses
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3, Pre-req. MAT321)
MAT324 Differential Equations 			
(3, Pre-req. MAT222 or MAT382)
MAT372 Mathematical Statistics II		
(3, Pre-req. MAT371)
MAT402 History of Mathematics 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT414 Combinatorics and Graph Theory 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT211)
BSc Mathematics of Finance
Programme Structure
Level 100 shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Mathematics I 		
(4 credits, core)
MAF101 Mathematics of Finance I (3 credits, core)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3 credits, core)
ICT121
Computing and Information Skills, 		
Fundamentals I (2 credits, GEC)
MGT100 Principles of Management 		
(3 credits, core)
COM141 Communication Skills I (3 credits, GEC)
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Mathematics II 		
(4 credits, core)
MAF102 Mathematics of Finance II 		
(3 credits, core)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics 		
(3 credits, core)
ICT122
Computing and Information Skills, 		
Fundamentals II (2 credits, core)
ACC100
Introductory to Accounting 		
(3 credits, GCE)
COM142 Communication Skills II 		
(3 credits Pre-req. COM 111)
Level 200 Shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 3
MAT221 Calculus I 				
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT122)
MAT242 Computing I 			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT122)

ACC201

Introduction to Mathematical Statistics
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT122)
Business Finance 			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. ACC100)
Intermediate Microeconomics 		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. ECO111)
Introduction to Cost Accounting 		
(3 credits, Core, Pre-req. ACC100)

Semester 4
MAT222 Calculus II 				
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT221)
MAT212 Introduction to Linear Algebra 		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT111)
ECO212
Intermediate Macroeconomics 		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. ECO112)
MAT244 Numerical Methods
		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT122)
ACC206 Accounting for Manufacturing and
Alternative Entities (3 credits, core, 		
Pre-req. ACC100)
MAF201 Mathematics of Finance III
		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAF102)
Level 300 Shall consist of the following courses:
Semester 5
Core courses
MAT321 Real Analysis I 			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT222)
ACC308 Cost and Management Accounting		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. ACC201)
MAF301 Mathematics of Finance IV
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAF201)
FIN301
Financial Institutions and Markets I		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. FIN200)

MAT471
MAT461
MAT421

Multivariate Statistics I
(3 credits, Optional, Pre-req. MAT371)
Calculus of Variations & Control Theory
(3 credits, Optional, Pre-req. MAT324)
Function of Complex Variables 		
(3 credits, Optional, Pre-req. MAT321)

Semester 8
Core Courses
MAT423 Mathematical Methods
		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT324)
MAF400 Project: Topics in Finance		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAF301, FIN301)
FIN404
Investment Analysis and Portfolio 		
Management (3 credits, Corer, 		
Pre-req. FIN300)
Optional Courses (Choose any 2)
MAF402 Optimization in Finance 		
(3 credits, optional, Pre-req. MAT 361)
FIN403
Financial Institutions and Markets II
(3 credits, optional, Pre-req. FIN301)
MAF404 Financial Models 			
(3 credits, optional, Pre-req. MAF401)
BIS309
Accounting Information Systems 		
(3 credits, optional, Pre-req. ACC206)
FIN402
International Business Finance 		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. FIN301)
Courses for Non-Mathematics Majors (Service courses)
MAT103 Mathematics for Allied 			
Sciences I (3, Pre-req. O-Level Credit in Mathematics)
MAT104 Mathematics for Allied Sciences II		
(3, Pre-req. MAT103)
MAT201 Ancillary Mathematics			
(3, Pre1-.req. MAT122 or A-Level Maths
.or equivalent)

Optional Courses (choose any 2)
STA361
Time Series Analysis 			
(3 credits, Optional, Pre-req. MAT271)
MAT361 Linear Programming and Game Theory
(3 credits, Optional, Pre-req. MAT212)
MAT371 Mathematical Statistics II 		
(3 credits, Optional, Pre-req. MAT271)
Semester 6
MAT322 Real Analysis II
			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT321)
MAT324 Differential Equations 			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT222)
MAF302 Stochastic Calculus I 			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAT222
FIN304
Principles of Risk Management and
Insurance. (3 credits, core,)
FIN 302
Financial Planning and Forecasting 		
(3 credits, core)
FIN 300
Financial Management
(3 credits, core,
MAF 300 Industrial Attachment			
(3 Credits, core)

Engineering Mathematics
MAT191 Design Mathematics I (3)
MAT192 Design Mathematics II (3)
MAT291 Engineering Mathematics I 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT111 and MAT122)
MAT292 Engineering Mathematics II 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT291)
MAT391 Engineering Mathematics III 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT292)
MAT392 Engineering Mathematics IV 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT391)
MAT394 Engineering Mathematics IVB 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT291)
MAT491 Engineering Mathematics V 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT292)
MAT492 Engineering Mathematics VI 		
(3, Pre-req. MAT292)

Level 400 Shall consist of the following courses:

Semester 5
MAT381 Calculus for Teachers I (3)
MAT383 Linear Algebra for Teachers (3)
MAT387 Mechanics for Teachers I (3)
MAT389 Linear Programming and Game Theory
for Teachers (3)

Semester 7
Core Courses
FIN400
Financial Theory and Analysis 		
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. FIN300)
MAF401 Stochastic Calculus II 			
(3 credits, core, Pre-req. MAF302)
Optional Courses (Choose any 3)
MAT474 Stochastic Processes 			
(3 credits, optional, Pre-req. MAT371)

194

Bachelor of Education Degree (Secondary)
In Semesters 5 to 8, students pursuing the Bachelor of
Education (Secondary) Programme shall take credits
from the following core courses:

Semester 6
MAT382 Calculus for Teachers II			
(3, Pre-req. MAT381)
MAT384 Computing for Teachers (3)
MAT388 Mechanics for Teachers II		
(3, Pre-req. MAT387)

Semester 7
MAT481 Geometry for Teachers I (3)
MAT483 Real Analysis for Teachers (3)
MAT485 Number Theory and Abstract Algebra
for Teachers (3)
Semester 8
MAT324 Differential Equations
(3, Pre-req. MAT222 or MAT382)
MAT482 Geometry for Teachers II
(3, Pre-req. MAT481)
MAT484 Introduction to Probability and Statistics
for Teachers (3)
General Education Courses
MAT101 Mathematics for Social Scientists (3)
MAT102 Mathematics in Business (3)
MAT105 Numeracy Skills (2)
Assessment and Examination
Performance in each course shall be evaluated by
the combination of continuous assessment and final
examination marks:
(a) Continuous Assessment (CA): In all years CA shall be
based on tests and/or assignments with at least two tests
per semester.
(b) The Project courses MAT401, MAT406; and the course
MAT404 shall be assessed by CA only.
(c) Examinations: Each course shall be examined at the
end of the semester.
(d) Final marks: The ratio between CA and Examination
normally shall be 1:2. For the courses MAT242, MAT348
and MAT384 the ratio between CA and Examination shall
be 1:1.
Progression from Semester to Semester
In order to proceed from one semester to the next,
a student must obtain a cumulative GPA, which is in
accordance with General Regulation 00.9.

DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS
BSC230: BSc DEGREE IN PHYSICS
• Single major programme
(Departmental Regulation2.3.1), leading to the award
of BSc (Physics).
• Combined major/minor
(Physics Major) (DepartmentalRegulation 2.3.2),
leading to the award of BSc
• Combined major/major programme
(DepartmentalRegulation 2.3.3), leading to the award
of BSc
• Combined major/minor (Physics Minor)
(DepartmentalRegulation 2.3.4), leading to the award
of BSc if the student is registered in the Faculty of
Science
LEVEL 100
Semester 1
PHY112: Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
Semester 2
PHY122: Electricity, Magnetism and Elements of
Modern Physics (4)

LEVEL 200
Semester 3
PHY231: Mechanics, Vibrations and Waves, Physical
Optics (3) (Pre-req. = PHY112)
PHY232: Properties of Matter, Basic
Thermodynamics and Introduction to
Nuclear Physics (3) 			
(Pre-req. = PHY112)
PHY239: Physics Practicals 3.1 (1) 		
(Pre-req. = PHY112, Co-req. = PHY231 or
PHY232)

Core Courses
PHY472: Statistical Mechanics I (3)
PHY473: Solid State Physics (3)
PHY478: Project in Physics I (3)
PHY479: Physics Practicals 7.1 (3)
(Pre-requisite = PHY359
or PHY369)

Semester 4
PHY241: Advanced Electricity and Magnetism (3)
(Pre-req. = PHY122)
PHY242: Basic Electronics (3) 			
(Pre-req. = PHY122)
PHY 249: Physics Practicals 4.1 (1 Credit) 		
(Pre-req.=PHY122,Co-req.= PHY241
or PHY242)

Optional Courses
PHY474: Physics of Renewable Energy (3)
PHY475: Microprocessor and Digital Systems (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY354)
PHY476: Mathematical Methods for Physical
Sciences II (3) (Pre-requisite = 		
PHY353)		
PHY477: Elements of Air Pollution II (3)

Levels 300 and 400
Single Major Programme

Semester 8
In semester 8, the single major programme shall consist
of 11 credits of core courses and additional credits may
be taken from optional courses in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62.

Semester 5
In semester 5, the single major programme shall consist
of 11 credits of core courses and additional credits may
be taken from optional courses in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
PHY351: Advanced Mechanics ( (3)		
(Pre-req. = PHY231)
PHY352: Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (3)
(Pre-req. = PHY231)
PHY354: Advanced Electronics I) (3) 		
(Pre-req.= PHY242
PHY359: Physics Practicals 5.1 (2) 		
(Pre-reqs.=PHY239 and PHY249)
Optional Courses
PHY353: Mathematical Methods for Physical
Sciences I (3)
PHY355: Basic Potential Fields in Geophysics (3)
PHY356: Special Relativity (3) 			
( P r e - r e q s . = P H Y 2 31 , P H Y 2 41 )
Semester 6
In semester 6, the single major programme shall consist
of 11 credits of core courses and additional credits may
be taken from optional courses in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
PHY361:

Introduction to Electromagnetism) (3)
(Pre-requisite = PHY241
PHY362: Analytical Thermodynamics (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY232)
PHY363: Vibrations, Waves and Advanced
Physical Optics (3) 			
(Pre-requisite = PHY231)
PHY369: Physics Practicals 6.1 (2) 		
(Pre-requisites = PHY239 and PHY249)
		
Optional Courses
PHY364: Advanced Electronics II (3)
(Pre-requisite= PHY354)		
PHY365: Physics of the Environment (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY231)		
PHY367: Elements of Air Pollution I (3)
Semester 7
In semester 7, the single major programme shall consist

195

of 11 credits of core courses and additional credits may
be taken from optional courses in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62

Core Courses
PHY 481: Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics (3)
PHY482: Statistical Mechanics II (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY472)
PHY483: Advanced Solid State Physics (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY473; Co-requisite =
PHY 482)
PHY489: Physics Practicals 8.1 (2)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY359 or PHY369)
		
Optional Courses
PHY485: Microcomputing for Physical Sciences (3)
PHY486: Basic Seismology (3)
PHY487: Introduction to Astrophysics (3)
PHY488: Project in Physics II (3)
Combined Major/Minor Programme (Physics Major)
Semester 5
In semester 5, the combined major/minor programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses and at least 3
credits from optional courses.
Core Courses
PHY351: Advanced Mechanics (3) 		
(Pre-requisite= PHY231)
PHY352: Introduction to Quantum Mechanics)
(3) (Pre-requisite = PHY231)
PHY359: Physics Practicals 5.1 (2) 		
(Pre-requisite = PHY239 and PHY249)
Optional Courses
PHY353: Mathematical Methods for Physical
Sciences I (3)
PHY354: Advanced Electronics I (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY242)
PHY355: Basic Potential Fields in Geophysics (3)
Semester 6
In semester 6, the combined major/minor programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses and at least 3
credits from optional courses.
Core Courses
PHY361: Introduction to Electromagnetism (3)
(Pre-requisite = PHY241)
PHY362: Analytical Thermodynamics (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY232)
PHY369: Physics Practicals 6.1 (2)

		

(Pre-requisite = PHY239 and PHY249)

Optional Courses
PHY363: Vibrations, Waves and Advanced Physical
Optics (3) (Pre-requisite = PHY231)		
PHY364: Advanced Electronics II) (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY354)
PHY365: Physics of the Environment (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY231)
PHY367: Elements of Air Pollution I (3)
Semester 7
In semester 7, the combined major/minor programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses and at least 3
credits from optional courses.
Core Courses
PHY472: Statistical Mechanics I (3)
PHY473: Solid State Physics (3)
PHY479: Physics Practicals 7.1 (2)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY359 or 		
PHY369)
Optional Courses
PHY474: Physics of Renewable Energy (3)
PHY475: Microprocessor and Digital Systems (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY354)
PHY477: Elements of Air Pollution II (3)
PHY 478: Project in Physics I (3)
		
Semester 8
In semester 8, the combined major/minor programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses and at least 3
credits from optional courses.
Core Courses
PHY481: Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics
PHY485: Microcomputing for Physical Sciences (3)
PHY 489: Physics Practicals 8.1 (2) (Pre-requisite =
PHY359 or PHY369) 		
Optional Courses
PHY487: Introduction to Astrophysics (3)
PHY488: Project in Physics II (3)
Combined Major/Major Programme
Semester 5
In semester 5, the combined major/major programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses. Additional
credits may be taken from optional courses PHY353,
PHY354, PHY355 and PHY356 in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
PHY351: Advanced Mechanics (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY231)
PHY352: Introduction to Quantum Mechanics
		
(3) (Pre-requisite = PHY231)
PHY359: Physics Practicals 5.1 (2)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY239 and PHY249)
		
Semester 6
In semester 6, the combined major/major programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses. Additional
credits may be taken from optional courses PHY363,
PHY364, PHY365 and PHY367 in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62.

Core Courses
PHY361: Introduction to Electromagnetism) (3)
(Pre-requisite = PHY241)
PHY362: Analytical Thermodynamics ( (3)
		
(Pre-requisite = PHY232)
PHY369: Physics Practicals 6.1 (2 )
( P re - re q u i s i t e = P H Y 2 3 9 a n d 2 4 9 )
Semester 7
In semester 7, the combined major/major programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses. Additional
credits may be taken from optional courses PHY474,
PHY475, PHY477 and PHY478 in accordance with
General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
PHY472: Statistical Mechanics I (3 )
PHY473: Solid State Physics (3)
PHY479: Physics Practicals 7.1 (2) (Pre-requisite
= PHY359 or PHY369) 		
Semester 8
In semester 8, the combined major/major programme
shall consist of 8 credits of core courses. Additional
credits may be taken from optional courses PHY 486 or
PHY 488 in accordance with General Regulation 00.62.
Core Courses
PHY481: Atomic and Basic Nuclear Physics (3)
PHY485: Microcomputing for Physical Sciences (3)
PHY489: Physics Practicals 8.1 (2) (Pre-requisite =
PHY359 or PHY369)
Combined Major/Minor Programme (Physics Minor)
Semesters 5-8
In semesters 5 - 8, the combined major/minor (Physics
Minor) programme shall consist of 6 to 8 credits of
any of the physics courses from the core courses or
optional courses of the Combined Major/Minor Physics
Programme as defined in Regulation 2.3.2, in the given
semester. To complete the Physics Minor programme,
a candidate must take 4 credits of practical courses,
PHY359 or PHY369 at Level 300, and PHY479 or PHY489
at Level 400.
BSC202: BSc DEGREE IN PHYSICS WITH METEOROLOGY
(Departmental Regulations 23.2.1 and 23.4) leading to
the award of BSc (Physics with Meteorology)
REGULATIONS
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the degree programme shall be as specified
in the Faculty of Science Regulations 23.2.1 and 23.4
Award of Degree
To be awarded a degree, a candidate/student must have
taken and passed all relevant courses as prescribed in
Section 13 and must satisfy the University of Botswana
Academic General Regulations 00.8 and 00.9 and
Faculty of Science Special Regulation 20.
Programme Structure
Level I00
Semester I
PHY112: Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
CHE101: General Chemistry I (4)
MAT111: Introductory Mathematics I (4)
COM141: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
ICT121: Computing Skills Fundamentals 1 (2 )

196

Semester II
PHY122: Electricity and Magnetism, Introduction
to Modern Physics (4)
CHE102: General Chemistry II (4)
		
(Pre-requisite:CHE 101)
MAT122: Introductory Mathematics II (4)
		
(Pre-requisite: MAT 111)
COM142: Academic and Professional Communication
(Science) (3)
ICT122:
Computing Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
LEVEL 200
Core Courses
Semester III
PHY232: Properties of Matter, Basic Thermodynamics
and Introduction to Nuclear Physics (3)
(Pre- requisite: PHY 112)
PMT231: The Earth’s Atmosphere (3)
MAT271:
MAT221:
CHE211:

Introduction to Mathematical Statistics (3)
(Pre-requisite: MAT 122)
Calculus I (3)(Pre-requisite: MAT 122)
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
(2) (Pre-requisite: CHE 102) Optional
Course(3)

Semester IV
PHY242: Basic Electronics (3) (Pre-requisite:		
PHY122)
PMT241 Thermodynamics (3)
MAT222: Calculus II(3) (Pre-requisite: MAT 221)
MAT244: Numerical Methods (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: MAT122)
PMT242: Computer Programming – FORTRAN,
		
MatLab (3)
WINTER SEMESTER
PMT299: Internship: Synoptic Meteorology (3)
Level 200
Optional Courses
Semester III
PHY231: Mechanics, Vibrations and Waves (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY 112)
MAT242: Computing I (3) (Pre-requisite: ICT 121
		
and 122)
Level 300
Semester V
Core Courses
PMT351: Atmospheric Radiation (3)
PMT352: Atmospheric and Ocean Dynamics I (3)
(Pre-requisite: MAT331 OR MAT222)
PHY353: Mathematical Methods for Physical
Sciences I (3)
MAT371: Mathematical Statistics 1 (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: MAT271)
Optional Course (3)
Semester VI
Core Courses
PMT361: Introduction to Agrometeorology (3)
PMT362: Numerical Weather Prediction (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY 232 and PMT352)
PMT369: Electronic Instrumentation (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY 242)
Optional Course (6)
WINTER SESSION
PMT399:

Internship: Forecasting and
Agrometeorology (3)

LEVEL 300		
Optional Courses
Semester V
PHY354: Advanced Electronics I (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY 242)
ENS314: Synoptic and Dynamic Climatology (3)
Semester VI
PHY364: Advanced Electronics II(3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY254)
PHY367: Elements of Air Pollution I (3)
PHY365: Physics of the Environment (3) 		
(Pre-requisite: PHY231)
LEVEL 400
Semester VII
Core Courses
PMT471: Global Circulation Models I (3)
		
(Pre-requisite PMT352)
PMT472: Atmospheric and Ocean Dynamics II (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PMT352)
PMT473: Boundary Layer Meteorology (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PMT351)
PMT474: Basic Atmospheric Chemistry (3)
Elective Course(3)
Semester VIII
PMT481: Global Circulation Models II (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PMT 352)
PMT482: Global Climate Change (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PMT 231)
PMT483: Cloud Physics (3)(Pre-requisite: PMT 351)
PMT489: Research Project (Pre-req: PMT361,
PMT362 and PMT369) (6)
BSc203: BSc DEGREE IN RADIATION AND HEALTH
PHYSICS
(Departmental Regulations 23.2.1 and 23.4) leading to
the award of BSc (Radiation and Health Physics)
REGULATIONS
Entrance Requirements
Admission to the degree programme shall be as specified
in the Faculty of Science Regulations 23.2.1 and 23.4
Award of Degree
To be awarded a degree, a candidate/student must have
taken and passed all relevant courses as prescribed in
Section 13 and must satisfy the University of Botswana
Academic General Regulations 00.8 and 00.9 and
Faculty of Science Special Regulation 20.
Programme Structure
LEVEL 100
Semester I
PHY112: Geometrical Optics and Mechanics (4)
CHE101: General Chemistry I (4)
MAT111: Introductory Mathematics I (4)
COM141: Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Science) (3)
ICT121:
Computing Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
Semester II
PHY122: Electricity and Magnetism, Introduction
to Modern Physics (4)
CHE102: General Chemistry II
		
(Pre-requisite: CHE101)
MAT122: Introductory Mathematics II (4)
		
(Pre-requisite: MAT111)
COM142 Academic and Professional Communica
tion (Science) (3)
ICT122:
Computing Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)

LEVEL 200 Semester III
PHY232: Properties of Matter, Basic Thermody
namics and Introduction to Nuclear Physics
(3) (Pre-requisite: PHY112)
PHY239: Physics Practicals 3.1 (1)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY112)
CHE211:
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
		
(2 Credits) (Pre-requisite: CHE102)
CHE213: Analytical Chemistry Laboratory (1)
		
(Co-requisite: CHE211)
ENH211: Introduction to Environmental Health (3)
MAT221: Calculus I (3) (Pre-requisite: MAT122)
MAT271: Introduction to Mathematical Statistics (3)
(Pre-requisite: MAT122)
Semester IV
Core Courses
PHY242: Basic Electronics (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY122)
PHY249: Physics Practicals 4.1 (1)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY122)
PRH241: Radiation Physics I (3)
PRH242: Radiation Therapy I (3)
Optional Course (3)
Elective Course (3)
WINTER SEMESTER
PRH299: Internship: Supervised Clinical and/or
Industrial Exposure (3)
LEVEL 200
Optional Courses
Semester IV (May take any one course)
PHY241: Electricity and Magnetism (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY 122)
CSI241:
Structured Programming (3)
ENH222: Epidemiology (3)
LEVEL 300
Semester V
Core Courses
PRH351: Radiation Physics II (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PRH241)
PRH352: Radiation Therapy II (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PRH242)
PRH353: Introduction to Radiography (3)
PRH354: Introduction to Radiology (3)
Optional Course (3)
Semester VI
Core Courses
PRH361: Radiobiology and Protection (3)
PRH362: Physics of Medical Imaging (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PRH 354)
PRH363: Radiation Detection and 		
Instrumentation (3)
(Pre-requisite: PHY242)
PRH365: Environmental Physics (3)
Elective Course (3)
WINTER SEMESTER
PRH399: Internship: Supervised Clinical and/or
Industrial Exposure (3)

LEVEL 400
Semester VII
Core Courses
PRH471: Nuclear Rules and Regulations (3)
PRH472: Fundamentals of Nuclear Energy
		
(3) (Pre-requisite: PHY232)
PRH481: Applied Nuclear Physics (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY232)
Optional Course (3)
Elective Course (3)
Semester VIII
PRH482: Radiation Protection and Dosimetry (3)
(Pre-requisite: PRH361)
PRH483: Applied Radiation Safety Techniques (3)
PRH485: Anatomy and Physiology for Medical
		
Physics (3)
PRH489: Research Project (6)
LEVEL 400
Optional Courses
Semester VII (May take any one course)
PHY477: Elements of Air Pollution II (3)
PHY476: Microprocessor and Digital Systems (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: PHY353)
PRH484 Environmental Radioactivity as one
		
of the optional courses.
SERVICE COURSES
The following Physics courses are offered as Service
Courses for non-Physics majors.
PHY161: Physics for Nurses (3)
PHY162: Physics Applied to Home Economics (3)
BEd (Secondary)
Semesters 5-8
In Semesters 5 - 8, students pursuing the BEd (Secondary)
programme shall choose credits from the core courses
or optional courses of the Combined Major/Minor
Physics Programme as defined in Regulation 2.3.2, or
from the Combined Major/Major Programme as defined
in Regulation 2.3.3, in the given semester. The courses
chosen must include practical courses PHY359, PHY369,
PHY479 and PHY489.
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
The Department of Physics currently offers the following
General Education courses under the Area 5 (Science
and Technology) pending the outcome of the University
review of General education Courses:
GEC252: Origin of the Universe (2)
GEC253: Energy and Society (2)
Assessment
Performance in each course shall be evaluated by
the combination of continuous assessment and final
examination marks in the ratio of 1:1, except for Practical
courses and Physics projects which will be assessed by CA
only.
Progression
In order to proceed from one semester to the next, a
student must obtain a Cumulative GPA which is in
accordance with General Regulation 00.9.

LEVEL 300
Optional Courses
Semester V (May take any one course)
MAT371: Mathematical Statistics I (3)
		
(Pre-requisite: MAT271)
ENH313: General Climatology (3)
PHY367: Elements of Air Pollution I (3)

197

Bachelor of Geomatics
CGB111 Geomatics I (4)
Introduction to Geomatics and review of the necessary
mathematics; measurements of land: plane surveying;
geodesy: the scientific foundation; measurements from

space: satellite positioning and navigation. Mapping and
managing geographic information.

198

199

FACULTY OF SOCIAL SCIENCES

DEAN
Prof. T. B. Balule
)LLB (UB), LLM& PhD (Edinburgh

FACULTY ADMINISTRATOR
,M. B. Maje
)BA PGDE (UB), MEd(Birmingham

FACULTY HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER
,T. Monthe
)BA (UB), MBA(UB

ECONOMICS
LAW
POLITICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE STUDIES
SOCIAL WORK
SOCIOLOGY
STATISTICS
PSYCHOLOGY
POPULATION STUDIES

200

Special Regulations of the
Faculty of Social Sciences.
24.00 General Regulations of the University shall apply.
24.01 Failure, without good cause, to deliver an
assignment within the first 24 hours of the due
date shall carry a penalty of 5 percentage marks.
Failure to submit the assignment before the end
of the week from the due date shall incur a zero
mark.
24.02 A student will be eligible to sit for final 		
examinations as follows:
- If they have a continuous assessment of 40%
- If they have attended 80% of the total classes
offered for a course.

DEPARTMENT OF ARTS IN
ECONOMICS
Bachelor of Economics

Special Departmental Regulations for Single Major,
Combined Major, and Minor in Economics
Entry Requirements
Subject to the provisions of General Regulation 20.20,
at least a credit in Mathematics shall be required for all
students intending to take Economics as a Major or Minor
subject. Alternative qualifications may be accepted as per
General Academic Regulation 20.24b. Requirements for
entry into the Bachelor of Arts (Economics) Single Major
Degree Programme are determined by the Department
of Economics Board and may vary from year to year.
The Department offers Economics as a Single Major
Bachelor of Arts (Economics) Degree, a Combined Major
(Major/Major) Degree for the BASS and other Degrees,
and a Minor in Economics. Students majoring in other
subjects may take courses in Economics provided the
pre-requisites are satisfied.
Single Major Programme.
Students intending to take Economics as a Single Major
shall take and pass the following courses:
Level 100
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences I (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
Semester 2
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences II (3)
STA121
Elements of Probability (2)
Level 200
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3) (prerequisite, ECO111)
ECO231
Intermediate Mathematics for Economists
(3) (pre-requisite, ECO111, ECO112 & STA101)

Semester 2
ECO212
Intermediate Macroeconomics (3) (prerequisite, ECO112)
ECO232
Intermediate Statistics for Economists (3)
(pre-requisites, ECO231, sta116 and/or
STA121)

ECO475

Level 300
All courses at this level are Core.

Combined Major Programme
Students intending to take Economics as a Combined
Major shall take and pass the following courses:

Semester 1
ECO311
Microeconomics I (3) (pre-requisite, ECO231
& ECO211)
ECO321
Macroeconomics I (3) (pre-requisite, ECO
212)
ECO331
Mathematics for Economists I (3) (prerequisite, ECO 212)
ECO341
Econometrics I (3) (pre-requisite, ECO 212)
ECO463
Economics of Botswana and Southern
Africa (3) (pre-requisite ECO 212)
Semester 2
ECO312
Microeconomics II (3) (pre-requisite, ECO311)
ECO322
Macroeconomics II (3) (pre-requisite, ECO
321)
ECO332
Mathematics for Economists II (3) (prerequisite, ECO331)
ECO342
Econometrics II (3) (pre-requisite, ECO341)
ECO465
History of Economic Thought (3) (prerequisite ECO 211, ECO 212)
Winter Session
ECO461
Industrial Attachment (3)
Level 400
Semester 1
ECO431
Research Methods in Economics (3 core)
Plus: 4 Optional Courses.
Semester 2
ECO432
Project in Applied Economics (3, core)
Plus: 4 Optional Courses.
Optional Courses
ECO411
Development Economics (pre-requisite,
ECO211 & ECO212)
ECO412
Development Problems and Policy (prerequisite, ECO211, & ECO212 OR ECO221 &
ECO222)
ECO421
International Trade (pre-requisite, ECO211 &
ECO212)
ECO422
International Finance (pre-requisite, ECO421)
ECO441
Economics of Agriculture (pre-requisite,
ECO312)
ECO442
Agricultural Policy and Rural Development
(pre-requisite, eco441)
ECO451
Environmental Economics (pre-requisite,
ECO211)
ECO452
Resource Economics (pre-requisite, ECO211)
ECO463
Economics of Botswana and Southern
Africa (pre-requisite, ECO212)
ECO464
Techniques of Planning (pre-requisite,
ECO211 & ECO212)
ECO465
History of Economic Thought (pre-requisite
ECO 211, ECO 222)
ECO466
Public Finance (pre-requisite, ECO211 &
ECO212)
ECO467
Labour Economics (pre-requisite, ECO211 &
ECO222)
ECO468
Industrial Economics (pre-requisite, ECO211)
ECO469
Money and Banking (pre-requisite, ECO212)
ECO473
Financial Economics (pre-requisite, ECO332)
ECO474
Health Economics (pre-requisite, ECO211)

201

Transport Economics (pre-requisite, ECO211
& ECO331)

NB: Students in Levels 300 and 400 may take any of the
above-listed optional courses provided they satisfy the
pre-requisites.

Level 100
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences I (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
Semester 2
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences II (3)
STA121
Elements of Probability (2)
Level 200
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3) (prerequisite, ECO111)
ECO231
Intermediate Mathematics for Economists
(3) (pre-requisite, ECO111, ECO112 & STA101)
Semester 2
ECO212
Intermediate Macroeconomics (3) (prerequisite, ECO112)
ECO232
Intermediate Statistics for Economists (3)
(pre-requisites, ECO231, STA116 and/or
STA121)
Level 300
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO311
Microeconomics I (3) (pre-requisite, ECO231
& ECO211)
ECO321
Macroeconomics I (3) (pre-requisite, ECO
212)
ECO331
Mathematics for Economists I (3) (prerequisite, ECO 212)
Semester 2
ECO312
Microeconomics II (3) (pre-requisite, ECO311)
ECO322
Macroeconomics II (3) (pre-requisite, ECO
321)
ECO332
Mathematics for Economists II (3) (prerequisite, ECO331)
Level 400
Semester 1
ECO341
Econometrics I (3) (pre-requisite, ECO 212)
ECO463
Economics of Botswana and Southern
Africa (3) (pre-requisite ECO 212)
Plus: one Optional Course
Semester 2
ECO342
Econometrics II (3) (pre-requisite, ECO341)
Plus: 2 Optional Courses.
Minor in Economics.
Students intending to take Economics as a Minor subject
shall take and pass the following courses:

Level 100
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences I (3)
Semester 2
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences II (3)
Level 200
All courses at this level are Core.
Semester 1
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3) (prerequisite, ECO111)
Semester2
ECO212
Intermediate Macroeconomics (3) (prerequisite, ECO112)
Levels 300 and 400
Students are required to take 2 Optional Courses.
Assessment.
The continuous assessment (CA) of each course will
normally include at least 2 components as outlined
in the General Academic Regulation 00.811. These 2
components will normally be in written form. However,
non-written presentations will count for no more than
10 percent of the CA. The CA will count for 40 percent
of the total assessment while the final examination
will count for 60 percent of the total assessment. This
applies to all courses except ECO432 (Project in Applied
Economics)
Research Proposal
All students taking ECO431 Research Methods in
Economics shall write a research proposal that shall be
graded, and there shall be no final examination for that
course. The proposal for this course will normally be used
as a basis for ECO432 Project in Applied Economics.
Progression from one Semester to Semester.
Progression from one Semester to the next shall be as per
General Regulations 00.9

DEPARTMENT OF LAW
The Department of Law offers programmes and courses
leading to the award of the following qualifications:
• Bachelor of Laws (LLB)
• Master of Laws (LLM)
Departmental Regulations General Provisions
Subject to the provisions of Academic General
Regulations and Faculty of Social Sciences Regulations,
the following Departmental Regulations shall apply.
Bachelor of Laws (LLB) Degree
Entry Requirements
1. The normal requirement for admission to the Bachelor
of Laws degree programme shall be the Botswana
General Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE)
obtained at one sitting with a minimum of five credits,
one of which shall be in English language, or an
equivalent qualification.
2. An applicant in possession of a Diploma in Law from
this University, obtained with a minimum classification
of a credit, or an equivalent qualification shall also be
eligible for admission to the LLB programme.

3. Subject to Academic General Regulation 00.4, a
student admitted to the LLB programme with a Diploma
in Law shall be exempted from taking Levels 100 and
200 courses on the LLB programme designated by the
Departmental Board as equivalent to courses passed
under the Diploma in Law Programme and shall be
allocated comparable credits under the LLB programme
for the exemptions. A student admitted to the LLB
programme with a Diploma in Law will not normally
be entitled to register for courses offered at levels 300,
400 and 500 of the LLB programme before completing
and accumulating credits for levels 100 and 200 Core,
Optional, Electives and General Education Courses.
Duration
The normal duration for the LLB degree programme
shall be ten (10) semesters on a full-time basis.
Students entitled to exemptions in terms of Academic
General Regulations, Faculty and Special Departmental
Regulations may however complete the programme
within a shorter period which, for students with a
Diploma in Law, may not be less than six (6) semesters
on a full time basis.
Programme Structure.
1.The LLB programme shall consist of specified Core
(C) and Optional (O) courses in the principal subject
Law offered at Levels 100 to 500, and Electives (E) and
General Education Courses (GEC) in other subject areas
offered at comparable levels.
2. Students shall normally be required to take and
complete credits for the Core courses in the manner
and sequence indicated in the programme structure.
The Core courses at each level and semester from Levels
100 to 400 have generally been designed and arranged
to prepare LLB students for other Core courses at each
successive higher level.
3. Optional courses on the LLB programme shall be
offered subject to optimal student and approval of the
Departmental Board.
4. Subject to changes approved from time to time, LLB
courses shall be arranged as follows:Level 100
Semester 1
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
LAW131 Introduction to Law (3)
LAW132 Comparative Legal History and Systems (3)
LAW133 Law of Persons (3)
GEC / Elective (3)
Total Number of Credits 17
Semester 2
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
LAW106 Customary Law (3)
LAW134 Family Law (3)
LAW135 Law and Social Research Methods (2)
GEC / Elective (3)
Total for Number of Credits 16
Level 200
Semester 3
LAW231 Criminal Law, General Principles (3)
LAW232 Delict, General Principles (3)
LAW233 Contract Law (4)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)
GEC /Elective (2)
Total Number of Credits 15

202

Semester 4
LAW235 Specific Offences in Criminal Law (3)
LAW236 Specific Delicts (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
LAW201 Introduction to Property Law (3)
GEC / Elective (4)
Total Number of Credits 16
Level 300
Semester 5
LAW202 Land and Mineral Resources Law (3)
LAW331 Civil Procedure and Practice (4)
LAW332 Evidence (4)
LAW333 Criminal Procedure (3)
LAW334 Employment Law (3)
Total Number of Credits 17
Semester 6
LAW335 Sale, Lease and Credit Agreements (3)
LAW336 Negotiable Instruments and Banking Law (3)
LAW337 Labour Relations Law (3)
LAW338 Law and the Environment (3)
LAW339 Succession and Administration of Estates (2)
And one of
LAW340 Insurance and Agency Law (3)
LAW217 Insolvency and Secured Transactions (3)
LAW218 Tax Law in Botswana (3)
Total Number of Credits 17
Level 400
Semester 7
LAW431 Public International Law I (3)
LAW432 Jurisprudence (4)
LAW433 Clinical Legal Education I (4)
LAW434 Law of Business Associations I (3)
And One of
LAW439 Gender and the Law (3)
LAW440 Law and the Media (3)
LAW441 Law and Health Care (3)
LAW442 Social Security Law (3)
Total Number of Credits 17
Semester 8
LAW435 Public International Law II (3)
LAW436 Clinical Legal Education II (4)
LAW437 Human Rights Law (3)
LAW438 Law of Business Associations II (3)
And one of
LAW439 Gender and the Law (3)
LAW440 Law and the Media (3)
LAW441 Law and Health Care (3)
LAW442 Social Security Law (3)
Total Number of Credits 16
Level 500
Semester 9
LAW531 Clinical Legal Education III (4)
LAW532 Conveyancing Principles and Practice (4)
LAW535 Research Paper (3)
And two of
LAW536 International Moot (3)
LAW537 Private International Law I (3)
LAW538 International Organizations (3)
LAW539 International Business Transactions (3)
LAW540 Intellectual Property Law I (3)
Total Number of Credits 17
Semester 10
LAW533 Introduction to Notarial Practice (4)
ACC407
Accounting for Lawyers (4)
And at least three of
LAW536 International Moot (3)
LAW541 Intellectual Property Law II (3)
LAW542
International Trade Law (3)

LAW538
LAW543
LAW539

International Organizations (3)
Private International Law II (3)
International Business Transactions (3)
Total Number of Credits 17
Minimum Total Credits for the Programme:
165 Credits

Award of Degree
A student shall be eligible for the award of the LLB
degree upon completion of a minimum of 165 credits
from the Core, Optional, Electives and GECs indicated in
the programme structure.
Assessment
1. The following Special Regulations shall supplement
Academic General Regulations and Faculty of Social
Sciences Regulations on assessment and grading of law
courses on the LLB programme.
2. Except for courses LAW135, Law and Social Research
Methods; LAW433, Clinical Legal Education I; LAW436,
Clinical Legal Education II; LAW531, Clinical Legal
Education III; LAW535, Research Paper; and LAW536,
International Moot, each Core and Optional course on
the LLB programme shall be assessed through continuous
assessment and a formal written examination taken at or
before the end of the semester.
Continuous Assessment
1. Continuous assessment shall consist of at least
two or more of the following pieces of work: written
assignments, written tests, oral tests, mock trials, moots,
class or seminar exercises, practicals, projects, research
exercises or independent study.
2. Except for the courses LAW135, Law and Social
Research Methods; LAW433, Clinical Legal Education
I; LAW436, Clinical Legal Education II; LAW531,
Clinical Legal Education III; LAW535, Research Paper;
and LAW536, International Moot, the ratio between
continuous assessment and the formal examination in
law courses shall be 2:3.
3. Law and Social Research Methods, LAW135, Law and
Social Research Methods, shall be assessed through
at least two or more pieces of continuous assessment
work. Each piece of continuous assessment work shall be
marked and shall contribute towards the final mark of
100 per cent for the course.
4. Clinical Legal Education Courses I to III shall be
assessed as follows:
a) LAW433 Clinical Legal Education I
1. Participation in seminars and written assignments 30%
2. Oral examination on work performed in the Legal
Clinic - 20%
3.End of semester examination - 50%
Total 100%
b) LAW 436 Clinical Legal Education II
1. Oral Examination on work performed in the Legal
Clinic - 40%
2. Moot/Mock trial documents and performance - 60%
Total 100%
c) LAW 531 Clinical Legal Education III
1. Internship Report - 30%
2. Moot/mock trial documents and performance - 50%
3. Oral examination on work performed in the Legal
Clinic - 20%
Total 100%
International Moot Law536

The Course Law536, International Moot, shall be assessed
as follows:
1. Documents prepared for the Moot - 60%
2. Advocacy skills in the Moot - 40%
Total 100%
Research Paper
The final version of the research paper in course LAW535
shall be submitted for examination by the relevant date
and marked out of 100 per cent. A student who fails
to submit the research paper for examination by the
relevant date shall be awarded an incomplete Grade (I)
in accordance with Academic General Regulation 00.844.
Delay and Failure to Submit Continuous Assessment Work
Subject to Special Departmental Regulations 3.6.4 and
3.65, failure without good cause to submit continuous
assessment work within twenty-four hours of the due
date shall carry a penalty of 5 percentage marks. Failure
to submit the work within forty-eight hours of the due
date shall carry a penalty of 50 percentage marks. Failure
to submit the work within one week from the due date
shall incur a zero mark.
Formal Examinations
Formal written examinations for Core and Optional law
courses on the LLB programme shall be of the type and
for the duration approved by the Departmental Board
and indicated in the course outline or at the beginning
of each course.
Service Courses
Subject to optimal student demand and the availability
of staff and other resources, the Department of Law
shall offer the following courses at levels 100 to 600 to
students not registered for law programmes.
Level 100
GEC277 Law and society in Botswana (2 credits,
Semester 1 or 2)
LAW151 Law and social work (4 credits, Semester 1)
Level 200
LAW251 Foundations of Business Law (3 credits,
Semester 1)
LAW252 Specific Business Transactions (4 credits,
Semester 2)
LAW253 Foundations of Engineering Law (3 credits,
Semester 2)
Level 300
LAW351 Introduction to Company Law (4 credits,
Semester 1)
LAW353 Planning and Environmental Law (3 credits,
Semester 1 or 2)
LAW354 Land Law for Geomatics (3 credits, Semester 1)
Level 400
LAW452 Construction Law (3 credits, Semester 1 or 2)
LAW453 Labour and Industrial Property Law (3
credits, Semester 1 or 2)
			

DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE
STUDIES
Diploma in Defence and Strategic Studies

Special Regulations for Diploma in Defence and Strategic
Studies
13.1 Preamble

203

Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations 10.1, special departmental regulations shall
apply.
13.2 Diploma Programme
The programme of study shall be offered for the award
of the Diploma in Defence and Strategic Studies (DDSS).
13.3 Entrance requirements
In line with University of Botswana entrance
qualifications (General Regulation 10.21 (a), admission
into the diploma shall be at least six subjects not below
the grade of E in the BGCSE or equivalent. English shall
be one of the required subjects. Five subjects may be
accepted. A grade of C shall be required in at least three
of the five subjects.
This programme is specifically meant for applicants
nominated by the Botswana Defence Force (BDF).
13.4 Duration of the programme
The programme shall be offered over a period of three
semesters including the winter break and shall comprise
of 64 credit hours.
14.0 Programme Structure
The Diploma in Defence and Strategic Studies shall
comprise of 100 and 200 core and optional courses,
electives in other areas offered at comparable levels
and general education courses (GECs). The diploma
programme will also benefit from degree level courses
that do not have pre-requisites.
14.2 The programme structure is illustrated below:
Semester 1
Core Course
POL100
Botswana Society, Politics, Economy and
Government (3)
POL103
Research Methodology (3)
POL105
Introduction to Strategic Studies (3)
POL113
Foreign Policy and Diplomacy (3)
PAD413
Leadership and Governance (3)
Optional Course
POL206

Introduction to International Peace Keeping
(3)

General Education Course
COM151

Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)

Semester 2
Core Course
POL104
Intro to International Relations (3)
POL112
Botswana’ National Security Policy (3)
PAD200 Human Resource Management in the
Military (3)
TRS220
Critical Thinking (3)
DSW206 Management and Supervision in (3)
Optional Course
POL213
Security Sector Governance (3 credits)
General Education Course
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)

Semester 3
Core Course
POL210
Introduction to Civil Military (3)
POL211
Introduction to Security Studies (3)
POL214
Introduction to Non-Tradition (3)
POL212
Africa in International Politics (3)
LAW111
Introduction to Law of Armed Conflict (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
Optional Course
HIS333
Intro to Foreign Policy, Dip. & (3)
15.0 Assessment
Subject to the Academic General Regulation 10, the
following Departmental regulations shall apply:
15.1 The mark for the continuous assessment of the
diploma is 40% while the final examination carries
60%. The continuous assessment may be in the form of
written examinations or essay assignments as directed
by a Lecturer of any particular course.
15.2 All students shall be required to pass in all the
prescribed courses.
15.3 Each course shall be examined by a two hour
written examinations at the end of each semester during
which the course is offered.
15.4 The written examinations shall constitute 60%
(final examination) and 40% (continuous assessment) of
the final grade.
15.5 The pass mark for each course shall be 50%
15.6 A student who fails a course shall repeat it in
the following year as there is no provision for a re-sit
in line with the regulations governing the conduct of
examinations at the University of Botswana.
16.0 Award of Diploma in Defence and Strategic Studies
A student shall be eligible for the award of Diploma in
Defence and Strategic Studies after satisfying all the
requirements of the programme. The award shall be
classified as distinction, merit, credit or pass according to
the CGPA as per UB general regulation 10.41.
Bachelor of Arts Degree
4.2. Programme Structures
The Department of Political and Administrative Studies
offers the following undergraduate programmes leading
to the award of the under-mentioned degrees:
4.2.1 Single Major Public Administration Programmes
(PAS Regulations 2.1) leading to the award of the BA
(Public Administration)
4.2.2 Single Major Political Science Programme
(PAS Regulations 2.2) leading to the award of the BA
(Political Science)

4.3 Entry Requirements
Admission to the programmes offered by the Department
shall be on the basis of performance in the Botswana
General Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE)
examination, or its equivalent, and as specified in
the General Academic Regulations. Applicants with a
recognised Diploma in Public Administration may also
be considered for entry into the Bachelor of Arts Public
Administration programme.
Requirements for entry into the Bachelor of Arts Public
Administration or Political Science Single Major Degree
Programmes are determined by the Department of
Political and Administrative Studies Board and may vary
from year to year.
4.4 Assessment
Performance in each course shall be evaluated by
the combination of continuous assessment and final
examination marks in the ratio of 2:3 in favour of the
final examination. The only exceptions are internships,
projects and seminars, which shall be assessed only
through assignments. The final examination for every
course shall normally be 2 hours long. However, the
department reserves the right to review the mode
of assessment, and respective lectures shall specify
approved mode of assessment prior to any intake or at
the start of the semester in which the course is taken.
4.5 Award of Degree
To be awarded a Degree, a student must satisfy the
appropriate provisions of the General Academic
Regulation 23.71 and the Special Regulations of the
Faculty of Social Sciences.
4.6 Degree Structure
4.6.1 The Public Administration and Political Sciences
courses shall be offered at Levels 100 to 400 for the
undergraduate programmes.
4.6.2 In addition to Public Administration and Political
Sciences courses, an undergraduate candidate majoring
in these courses shall take the General Education Courses
(GECs) and Electives in accordance with the General
Regulation 00.2124

Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD202 Public Administration in Botswana (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macro Economics for NonMajors (pre-requisite, ECO112) (3); or
ECO212
Intermediate Macro Economics (3) (prerequisite, ECO112)
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
Plus
One optional (3)
One Elective (3)
Total Credits 15
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD302 Human Resource Management (3)
PAD306 Public Policy Analysis (3)
PAD303 Local Government Management (3)
One Optional Course from:
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3)
PAD308 Industrial Relations (3)
POL306
International Political Economy (3)
POL310
Contemporary Africa (3)
Plus one elective (3)
Total Credits 15

4.6.4 The Department of Political and Administrative
Studies offers GECs as outlined in the General Academic
Regulations.

Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD304 Public Enterprise Management (3)
PAD307
Human Resource Development (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
Two Optional courses from:
POL309
Politics of Poverty in Southern Africa (3)
SOC327 Political Sociology (3) or
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (2) or
ENS402
Natural Resources Management and
Economics (2)
Total Credits 15

5.0 Undergraduate Degree Course Listings.
5.1 Bachelor of Arts Degree in Public Administration
(Single Major)

4.2.4 Combined Major/Minor Programme (PAS
Regulations 2.4.1 and 2.4.2) leading to the award of BA
(Social Science)
4.2.5 Combined Minor in Public Administration + Major
in Other Programme

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
POL101
Introductions to Political Science (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
Total Credits 17

Subject to the provisions of the General Academic
Regulations, the following Departmental Regulations
shall apply.

Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD201
Organization Theories (3)
ECO221
Basic Macroeconomics for non-Majors (3)
(pre-requisite, eco111) or
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (pre-requisite,
ECO111) (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)
Plus one Elective
Total Credits 15

4.6.3 The Department of Political and Administrative
Studies offers undergraduate Public Administration and
Political Science courses (as Combined Majors including
a Major combined with a Minor) to students majoring in
other subjects. In addition, the Department offers single
majors in Political Science and Public Administration,
subject to departmental approval.

4.2.3 Combined Major/Major Programme (PAS
Regulations 2.3) leading to the award of the BA (Social
Science)

4.2.6 Combined Minor in Political Science + Major Other
Programme

Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD102
Institutions and Processors of Public
Administration (3)
POL102
The Modern State (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals (2)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
Total Credits 17

204

Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD401
Development Administration (3)
PAD403 Internship (3)
PAD402 Government Budgeting (3)
Two Optional Courses from;

PAD405 Seminar in Public Policy (3)
PAD407
Comparative Public Administration (3)
PAD413
Leadership & Governance (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD406 Ethics and Public Administration (3)
PAD404 Contemporary Issues in Public Admin (3)
PAD410
Public Financial Management (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
PAD408 International Administration (3)
PAD411
Local Government Finance (3)
PAD412
Research Project in Public Administration (3)
Total Credits 15
5.2 Bachelor of Social Science Degree Programme in
Political Science (Single Major)
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
ECO111
Basic Micro Economics (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
Total credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL102
The Modern State (3)
PAD102
Institutions and Processes of Public
Administration (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro Economics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
Total Credits 17
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL201
Botswana Politics (3)
ECO221
Intermediate Micro Economics for Nonmajor (3) or
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3) ICT122 Computer
Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
Plus one Elective (3)
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL202
Classical Political Thought (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macroeconomics for Nonmajor (3) or
ECO212
Intermediate Macro Economics (3)
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL204
Media and Politics (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
Plus one Elective (3)
Total Credits 15
Level 300
Semester 1
POL301
Modern Political Thought (3)
POL306
International Political Economy (3)

POL310

Contemporary Africa (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL302
Politics of South Africa (3)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3)
Plus one Elective (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL305
Politics of Southern Africa (3)
POL307
Politics of Regionalism (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
POL309
Politics of Poverty in Southern Africa (3)
SOC327 Political Sociology (3)
POL308
Politics & Management of Natural 		
Resources (3)/ core-coding
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (2) or
ENS402
Natural Resource Management & 		
Economics (2)
Total Credits 15
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL401
International Relations (3)
POL402
Democratic Theory and Practice (3)
POL410
Internship in Political Science (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
POL406
Africa in World Politics (3)
POL407
Civil Military Relations (3)
PAD402 Government Budgeting (3)
PAD413
Leadership & Governance (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL405
Comparative Politics (3)
POL409
Security Studies (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
POL403
Modern Ideologies (3)
POL411
Research Project in Political Science (3)
PAD408 International Administration (3)
Plus one Elective (3)
Total Credits 15
5.3 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree Programme
Major in Public Administration + Major in Political
Science
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD102
Institutions and Processes of Public
Administration (3)
POL102
The Modern State (3)
ECO112
Basic Macroeconomics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)

205

Total Credits 17
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD201
Organisation Theories (3)
POL201
Botswana Politics (3)
ECO221
Intermediate Micro Economics for NonMajors (3) or
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)
Plus one Elective (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD202 Public Administration in Botswana (3)
POL202
Classical Political Thought (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macroeconomics for NonMajors (3) or
ECO212
Intermediate Macro Economics (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
POL204
Media and Politics (3)
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
Total Credits 15
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD306 Public Policy Analysis (3)
POL301
Modern Political Thought (3)
Three Optional Courses from:
POL310
Contemporary Africa (3)
PAD302 Human Resource Management (3)
POL302
Politics in South Africa (3)
PAD303 Local Government Management (3)
POL306
International Political Economy (3)
PAD308 Industrial Relations (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD307
Human Resource Development (3)
POL307
Politics of Regionalism (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
POL305
Politics of Southern Africa (3)
POL309
Politics of Poverty in Southern Africa (3)
PAD304 Public Enterprise Management (3)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (2) or
ENS402
Natural Resource Management & 		
Economics (2)
Total Credits 15
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD401
Development Administration (3)
POL401
International Relations (3)
PAD402 Government Budgeting (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
PAD403 OR POL410 Internship in Public Administration/
Political Science (3)
PAD407
Comparative Public Administration (3)
PAD405 Case Studies in Public Policy
PAD413
Leadership & Governance
POL402
Democratic Theory and Practice (3)
POL406
Africa in World Politics (3)
Total Credits 15

Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD404 Contemporary Issues in Public 		
Administration (3)
POL405
Comparative Politics (3)
Three Optional Courses from:
PAD406 Ethics and Public Management (3)
PAD408 International Administration (3)
PAD410
Public Financial Administrations (3)
POL409
Security Studies (3)
PAD412
OR POL411 Research Project in Public
Administration/Political Science (3)
Total Credits 15
5.4 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree Programme
Major in Political Science and Major in Another Subject.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
ECO111
Basic Micro-Economics (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 17

Plus other Major Subject Courses
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL307
Politics of Regionalism (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL305
Politics of Southern (3)
POL309
Politics of Poverty in Southern Africa (3)
ENS301
Environmental Issues (2) or
ENS402
Natural Resource Management and
Economics (2)
Plus Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL401
International Relations (3)
POL402
Democratic Theory and Practice (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL406
Africa in World Politics (3)
POL407
Civil Military Relations (3)
POL411
Research Project in Political Science (3)
or Optional Course from Other Major
Plus Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15

Semester 2
Core Courses
POL102
The Modern State (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro Economics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 17

Semester 2
Core Courses
POL405
Comparative Politics (3)

Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL201
Botswana Politics (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)
ECO221
Intermediate Microeconomics for NonEconomists (3) or
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3)
Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15

5.5 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree Programme
Major Public Administration + Other MAJOR

Semester 2
Core Courses
POL202
Classical Political Thought (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macroeconomics for NonMajors or
ECO212
Intermediate Macroeconomics (3)
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
Plus other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL301
Modern Political Thought (3)
POL306
International Political Economy (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL302
Politics of South Africa (3)
SOC334 Sociology of Development
or Optional Course from Other Major (3)
Plus One Elective (3)

Two Optional Courses from:
POL403
Modern Ideologies (3)
POL409
Security Studies (3)
PAD408 International Administration (3)
or Optional Course from other major (3)
Plus Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
ECO111
Basic Micro Economics (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3) Plus
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (3)
Plus Other Major Subject courses.
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD102
Institutions & Processes of Public 		
Administration (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro Economics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools Economics (3) (pre-requisite
STA111)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
Plus Other Major Subject courses.
Total Credits 17
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD201
Organisation Theories (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)

206

ECO221

Intermediate Microeconomics for Nonmajors (3) or
ECO211
Intermediate Microeconomics (3)
Plus Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD202 Public Administration in Botswana (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macroeconomics for NonMajors (3) or
ECO212
Intermediate Macro Economics (3)
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
Total Credits 17
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD306 Public Policy Analysis (3)
PAD302 Human Resource Management (3)
One Optional Course from:
PAD308 Industrial Relations
PAD303 Local Government Management (3)
or Optional Course from other major
Plus one Elective (3), and
Other Major Subject courses.
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD307
Human Resource Development (3)
LAW237 Administrative LAW (3)
One Optional course from:
PAD304 Public Enterprise Management (3)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (2) or
ENS402
Natural Resource Management & 		
Economics (2)
or Optional Course from the other Major
Subject (3)
Plus Other Major Subject courses
Total Credits 15
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD401
Development Administration (3)
PAD402 Government Budgeting (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
PAD403 Internship (3)
PAD407
Comparative Public Administration (3)
PAD405 Case Studies in Public Policy
or Optional Course from other major 		
Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Course
PAD404 Contemporary Issues in Public 		
Administration(3)
One Optional Course from
PAD406 Ethics and Accountability (3)
PAD408 International Administration (3)
PAD410
Public Financial Administrations (3)
PAD412
Research Project in Public Administration
or Optional Course from other Major Subject
Plus One Elective (3)
Other Major Subject Courses
Total Credits 15
5.6 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree Programme:
Major in Political Science and Minor in Other Subject

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy Skills
(Social Sciences) (3)
Plus Minor Subject Course (3)
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL102
The Modern State (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro Economics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
Total Credits 17
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL201
Botswana Politics (3)
ECO221
Intermediate Micro Economics for NonMajors (3) or
ECO211
Intermediate Micro Economics (3)
One Optional Course from:
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)
PAD201
Organisational Theories
Plus one Elective (3) and one course from Minor Subject
(3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL202
Classical Political Thought (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macro Economics for NonMajors (3) or
ECO212
Intermediate Macro Economics (3)
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL204
Media and Politics (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
Plus One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL301
Modern Political Thought (3)
POL310
Contemporary Africa (3)
One Optional Course from
POL302
Politics of South Africa (3)
POL306
International Political Economy (3)
SOC338 Democracy and Development (3)
Plus one Elective (3) and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL307
Politics of Regionalism (3)
POL305
Politics of Southern Africa (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
One Optional Course from
POL309
Politics of Poverty in Southern Africa (3)
ENS301
Contemporary Environmental Issues (2)
or
ENS402
Natural Resource Management and
Economics (2)

Plus One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
POL401
International Relations (3)
POL402
Democratic Theory and Practice (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL406
Africa in World Politics (3)
POL407
Civil Military Relations (3)
POL410
Internship in Political Science (3)
Plus one Elective (3) and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
POL405
Comparative Politics (3)
POL409
Security Studies (3)
One Optional Course from:
POL403
Modern Ideologies (3)
POL411
Research Project in Political Science (3)
Plus one Elective (3), and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
5.7 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree Programme
Major in Public Administration + Minor in Other Subject
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
ECO111
Basic Micro Economics (3)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
Plus two GECs and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 19
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD102
Institutions and Processes of Public
Administration (3)
POL102
The Modern State (3)
ECO112
Basic Macro Economics (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
Plus two GECs and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 19
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD201
Organisation Theories (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)
ECO221
Intermediate Micro Economics for NonMajors (3)
Plus one Elective, two GECs and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 19
Semester 2
Core Course
PAD202 Public Administration in Botswana (3)
ECO222
Intermediate Macro Economics for NonMajors (3)
One Optional Course from:
SOC226 Concepts & Principles of Social Research (3)
POL 204 Media and Politics

207

Plus one Elective, one GEC and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 17
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD302 Human Resource Management (3)
PAD306 Public Policy Analysis (3)
Two Optional Courses from:
PAD303 Local Government Management (3)
PAD308 Industrial Relations (3)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3)
Plus one GEC and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD307
Human Resource Development (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
One Optional Course from:
PAD304 Public Enterprise Management (3)
POL308
Politics and Management of Natural
Resources (3)
or ENS301 Contemporary Environmental Issues (2)
or ENS402 Natural Resource Management and
Economics (2)
Plus two GECs and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 16
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
PAD401
Development Administration (3)
PAD402 Government Budgeting (3)
One Optional Course from:
PAD403 Internship (3)
PAD407
Comparative Public Administration (3)
PAD405 Case Studies in Public Policy Analysis (3)
Plus one Elective and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 15
Semester 2
Core Courses
PAD404 Contemporary Issues in Public 		
Administration (3)
PAD410
Public Financial Management (3)
One Optional Course from:
PAD406 Ethics and Public Management (3)
PAD411
Local Government Finance (3)
PAD412
Research Project in Public Administration (3)
Plus one Elective, one GEC and
One course from Minor Subject (3)
Total Credits 17
5.8 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree
Programme: Minor Political Science + Major in Other
Subject
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
Plus courses from other Major Subject,
and two GECs.
Total Credits 16

Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
POL102
The Modern State (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
Plus courses from other Major Subject,
One Elective and two GECs.
Total Credits 16
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
POL201
Botswana Politics (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Major Subject, one Elective
and two GECs.
Total Credits 16
Semester (2)
Core Courses for Minor
POL202
Classical Political Thought (3)
Plus two Core Courses Major Subject, one Optional
Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
POL301
Modern Political Thought (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Major Subject, one Optional
Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
POL305
Politics of Southern Africa (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Major Subject,
One Optional Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
POL401
International Relations (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Major Subject, one
Optional Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
POL405
Comparative Politics (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Major Subject, one Optional
Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
5.9 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences Degree
Programme: Minor in Public Administration + Major in
Other Subject.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
PAD101
Introduction to Public Administration (3)
STA111
Basic Statistics (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Major Subject, and
two GECs.
Total Credits 16
Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
PAD102
Institutions and Processes of Public
Administration (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Major Subject and two

GECs.
Total Credits 16
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
PAD201
Organisation Theories (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Subject, one Elective
and two GECs.
Total Credits 16

Duration of the Programme
The normal duration of the Diploma in Population
Studies Programme shall be 4 semesters on a full-time
basis.
Programme Structure
The curriculum and methods of assessment shall be as
follows:
1. CURRICULUM:

Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
PAD202 Public Administration in Botswana (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Major Subject, one
Optional Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
PAD306 Public Policy Analysis (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Major Subject, one
Optional Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17
Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
PAD307
Human Resource Management (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Major Subject, one
Optional Course and two GECs.
Total Credits 16
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses for Minor
PAD401
Development Administration (3)
Plus two Core Courses from Other Major Subject, one
Optional Course and one Elective.
Total Credits 18
Semester 2
Core Courses for Minor
PAD406 Ethics & Public Management (3) OR:
PAD404 Contemporary Issues in Public Administration
Plus two Major Core Courses from Major Subject, one
Optional Course, one Elective and one GEC.
Total Credits 17

DEPARTMENT OF
POPULATION STUDIES
Diploma in Population Studies
Special Regulations for Diploma in Population Studies
Subject to the provisions of the Academic General
Regulations 000 and 100, and the Faculty of Social
Sciences Special Regulations, the following Special
Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirement for entrance into Diploma in
Population Studies shall be:
a) A minimum of 3 credits (one of which is Mathematics)
in the Botswana General Certificate of Secondary
Education (BGCSE) or its equivalent;
Or:
b) A CGPA of at least 2.0 at the Certificate in Civil
Registration and Population Dynamics of this University
or its equivalent;

208

Level 100
Semester 1
Core courses (6 credits)
POP120
Introduction to Substantive Demography (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
Elective courses (6)
General Education courses (3)
Students planning to enter a degree programme after
the completing of their Diploma should take STA101 as
well.
Semester 2
Core courses (6 credits)
POP121
Introduction to Epidemiology and Technical
Demography (3)
POP110
Elements of Research Methods (3)
Elective courses (6)
General Education courses (3)
Students planning to enter a degree programme after
the completing of their Diploma should take STA102 as
well.
Level 200
Semester 3
Core courses (6 credits)
POP200
Methods of Demographic Analysis (3 credits)
POP201
Computing for Demographers (3)
Optional courses (3credits)
Select from the following:
POP202
Introduction to Population and 		
Developments (3)
POP206
Population Policy of Botswana (3)
General Education Courses (6)
Semester 4
Core Courses (3 credits)
POP203
Demographic Data Analysis and Report
Writing (3)
Optional course (3 credits)
Select one from the following:
POP204
Reproductive Health and Family Planning (3)
POP205
Demography of Southern Africa (3)
Elective courses (6)
General Education courses (3).
It is recommended that all Diploma students do
POP202: Introduction to Population and Development.
2. METHODS OF ASSESSMENTS
Each course shall be evaluated by a combination
of continuous assessment and final examination or
semester paper in the ratio of 2:3.
Award of Diploma
In order to be awarded the Diploma, a student must
have completed a minimum of 60 credits and have a
cumulative GPA of at least 2.0.
Bachelor of Arts Degree

Special Regulations for the Major/Major Programme in
Population Studies.
Subject to the provisions of the Academic General
Regulations 000 and 200, the following Special
Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
The normal requirement for entrance into the Bachelor’s
Degree in Population Studies Programme shall be:
a) A minimum of 5 credits (one of which is Mathematics)
in the Botswana General Certificate of Secondary
Education (BGCSE) or its equivalent;
Or:
b) A GPA of at least 2.0 in the Diploma in Population
Studies of this University or its equivalent; Other
qualifications for entrance to the Bachelor’s Degree in
Population Studies may be accepted on their own merit
as alternatives as shown by the General Regulation
00.052.
Duration of the Programme
The normal duration for the Bachelor of Arts Degree in
Population Studies Programme shall be 8 to 10 semesters
of full-time study.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core courses (9 credits)
POP120
Introduction to Substantive Demography (3)
STA101
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
General Education courses (8)
Semester 2
Core courses (6 credits)
POP121
Introduction to Epidemiology and Technical
Demography (3)
STA102
Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences (3) (pre-requisite STA101)
General Education courses (8)
Level 200
Semester 3
Core courses (6 credits)
POP220
History of Fertility, Mortality and Migration
(3)
POP221
Theories of Fertility, Mortality and Migration
(3)
Students entering the degree programme after the
completing of their diploma should take STA101 as well
if the course was not taken during the diploma studies.
Semester 4
Core courses (6 credits)
POP222
Demography of Botswana (3)
POP223
Demographic Techniques (3)
Optional courses (3)
Select one from the following:
POP224
Demographic Aspects of the Labour Force (3)
POP225
Demographic Aspects of the HIV/AIDS
Epidemic (3)
Elective courses (3)
General Education courses (3)
Students entering the degree programme after the
completing of their diploma should take STA102 as well
if the course was not taken during the diploma studies.

Level 300
Semester 5
Core course (9 credits)
POP300
Sources, Evaluation, Adjustment and Analysis
of Demographic Data (3)
POP302
Research Methods (3)
POP304
Inter-relationships of Fertility, Mortality and
Migration (3)
Semester 6
Core courses (3 credits)
POP301
Computer Applications
Analysis (3)

in

Population

Optional courses (3)
Select from the following:
POP303
Migration, Urbanisation and Development
(3)
POP305
Population Policies and Programmes (3)
General Education courses (4)
Level 400
Semester 7
Core courses (9 credits)
POP400
Integrating Population Variables into
Development Planning (3)
POP402
Indirect Estimation Techniques (3)
Elective courses (3)
General Education courses (2)
Semester 8
Core course
POP401
Research paper (3)
Optional courses (6 credits)
Select the two from the following:
POP403
Population, Development and Environment
(3)
POP404
Gender, Reproductive Health and 		
Development (3)
POP405
Demographic Dimensions of Poverty (3)
POP406
Demographic Aspects of Ageing (3)
POP407
Demographics (3)
Assessment
Each course shall be evaluated by a combination
of continuous assessment and final examination or
semester paper in the ratio of 2:3.
Progression
In order to proceed from one semester to the next,
a student must obtain a Cumulative GPA that is in
accordance with General Regulation 00.9.
General Education Courses offered by the Department.
General Education Courses offered by the Department:
Semester 1 & 2
GEC372 Migration and Globalisation (2)
GEC278 Population and Society (2)
GEC330 Research Methods (3) (Co-taught on
rotational basis with Sociology Department).

DEPARTMENTOF
PSYCHOLOGY
Programmes
The Department offers two degree programmes at
undergraduate level:

209

i) Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences degree with
Psychology as Combined Major (Major/Major) and
ii) Bachelor of Psychology degree, which is a semiprofessional programme.
2.0 Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences with
Psychology as Combined Major
2.1 Aims of the Programme
The main aim of a Bachelor’s programme with Psychology
as a Combined Major is to introduce students to the
discipline of psychology and provide them with basic
knowledge about major substantive areas of research in
psychology.
2.2 Entrance Requirement
Subject to provisions of General Academic Regulations
20.2, a credit in Mathematics shall be required for
applicants intending to enroll for Psychology as a
Combined Major.
2.3 General Provisions.
2.3.1 Psychology as a Combined Major shall consist of an
eight semester programme and with core and optional
psychology courses.
2.3.2 Subject to special regulations of programmes in
other departments, students may pursue a combined
major in psychology and any other major of their choice.
2.3.3 Students who enrol for psychology as part of
a combined degree (major/major) shall be expected
to combine courses from psychology and the second
subject in the ratio of 50:50 (major/major).
2.3.4 Students at any level of their university studies may
be allowed to enroll in a psychology course at another
level with the permission of the Head of Department.
2.3.5 A student shall take a minimum 15 psychology (PSY)
courses (5 of which are the Psychology core courses)
and STA101 and STA116 to meet the requirements to
graduate with Psychology as a Combined major.
2.4 Programme Structure
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
STA101*) Mathematics for Social Sciences I (3)
STA116*) Introduction to Statistics (4)
PSY101 Introduction to Psychology (3)*) or
equivalent course
Semester 2
Core Courses
PSY102
Biological Basis of Human Behaviour (3)
Level 200
Combined Major students are expected to enrol in at
least two psychology courses per Semester.
Semester 3
Core Courses
PSY201
Theories of Personality (3)
PSY209
Research in Psychology: Methods and
Designs (3)
Optional Courses
PSY202
Social Psychology (3)
PSY203
Developmental Psychology of Childhood
and Adolescence (3)
PSY204
History and Philosophy of Psychology (3)
Semester 4
Core Courses
PSY208
Statistics for Psychology I (3)

Optional Courses
PSY206
Developmental Psychology of Adulthood
and Old Age (3)
PSY207
Psychology of Work and Labour Relations (3)
Level 300
For the Combined Major, all Level 300 psychology courses
are optional in order to enable the student flexibility in
his/her choice of courses. Level 300 Combined Major
students are expected to enrol in at least two psychology
courses per Semester.
Semester 5
Optional Courses
PSY302
Psychological Testing and Psychometrics (3)
PSY303
Cognition and Learning (3)
PSY305
Organisational and Personnel Psychology (3)
Semester 6
Optional Courses
PSY309
Human Factors in the Work Environment (3)
PSY310
Consumer Psychology (3)
PSY304
Health Psychology (3)
PSY312
Research Proposal in Psychology (3)
Level 400
For the Combined Major, all Level 400 psychology courses
are optional in order to enable the student flexibility in
his/her choice of courses. Level 400 Combined Major
students are expected to enrol in at least two psychology
courses per Semester.
Semester 7
Optional Courses
PSY406
Psychological Challenges of HIV/AIDS (3)
PSY407
Special Topics in Psychology (3)
PSY409
Sensation and Perception (3)
PSY405) Training and Human Resource Development
(3)
Semester 8
Optional Courses
PSY410
Applied Psychology (3)
PSY411
Psychopathology (3)
PSY412
Research Project (3)
2.5 Assessment
Assessment of psychology courses shall be based on any
one or combinations of the following: tests, assignments,
written examinations, oral examinations as approved by
the Department.
3.0 Bachelor of Psychology (B.Psych.) Programme
3.1 Objectives of the Programme
Students who graduate with a Bachelor of Psychology
(B.Psych.) degree shall be qualified to work as semiprofessionals in the field of psychology, more specifically
as “psychological counsellors”. In order to become full
professional psychologists, graduates would, however,
require post-graduate training in Psychology on either
Masters or Doctorate level that provides coursework and
internship.
3.2 Entrance Requirement
Subject to provisions of General Academic Regulations
20.2, a credit in Mathematics shall be required for
applicants intending to enrol for a B.Psych. degree.
3.3 General Provisions
3.3.1 The B.Psych. degree shall consist of an eight-

semester programme.
3.3.2 A student who intends to pursue a B.Psych. degree
shall take a minimum of 87 credits in psychology courses
(consisting of 54 credits in core and 15 credits in optional
psychology courses and 18 credits in the internship), 6
credits from core Mathematics and Statistics courses,
and 20 credits from General Education Courses. Required
credits from another subject taken during Level 100 and
Level 200 shall be determined by this other subject.
3.3.2.1 The core and optional psychology courses shall
consist of 6 credits at Level 100, 12 credits at Level 200,
24 credits at Level 300 and 33 credits at Level 400.
3.3.2.2 B. Psych. Students at any level of their university
studies may be allowed to enrol in a psychology course
at another level with the permission of the Head of
Department.
3.3.2.3 A student who intends to pursue a B.Psych.
Degree shall enrol in a Bachelor’s programme of any
faculty at Level 100 and Level 200 and study psychology
together with another major subject.
3.3.2.4 Students shall normally be selected for the
B.Psych. programme after completing Level 200 to start
the programme at Level 300 (fifth semester).
3.3.2.5 Students who are not selected for the B.Psych.
programme may continue with psychology as a
Combined Major.

Optional Courses
(Students choose at least one)
PSY206
Developmental Psychology of Adulthood
and Old Age (3)
PSY207
Psychology of Work and Labour Relations (3)
Level 300
Semester 5
Core Courses
PSY301
Abnormal Psychology I (3)
PSY302
Psychological Testing and Psychometrics (3)
Optional Courses
(Students choose at least one)
PSY304
Health Psychology (3)
PSY305
Organisational and Personnel Psychology (3)
PSY303
Cognition and Learning (3)
Semester 6
Core Courses
PSY306
Counselling I (3)
PSY307
Psychological Assessment (3)
PSY312
Research Proposal in Psychology (3)
Optional Courses
(Students choose at least one)
PSY309
Human Factors in the Work Environment (3)
PSY310
Consumer Psychology (3)
PSY304
Health Psychology (3)

3.4 Programme Structure

Level 400
Semester 7
Core Courses
PSY401
Research Project (3) (pre-requisite PSY312 &
restricted to B Psych students only)
PSY402
Abnormal Psychology II (3) (pre-requisite
PSY301 & restricted to B Psych students
only)
PSY403
Counselling II (3) (pre-requisite PSY306 &
restricted to B Psych students only)
PSY404*) Psychotherapy (3) (Restricted to B Psych s
tudents only)

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
STA101*) Mathematics for Social Sciences I (3)
STA116*) Introduction to Statistics (4)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
*) or
equivalent course

Optional courses
(Students choose at least two courses)
PSY405**) Training and Human Resource Development
(3)
PSY406
Psychological Challenges of HIV/AIDS (3)
PSY407
Special Topics in Psychology (3)
PSY409
Sensation and Perception (3)

Semester 2
Core Courses
PSY102
Biological Basis of Human Behaviour (3)

N.B.
*) This course is recommended to students who wish to
pursue a career in the field of clinical psychology.

Level 200
Semester 3
Core Courses
PSY201
Theories of Personality (3)
PSY202
Social Psychology (3)
PSY209
Research in Psychology: Methods and
Designs (3)

**) This course is recommended to students who wish to
pursue a career in the field of industrial psychology.

Optional Courses
(Students choose at least one)
PSY203
Developmental Psychology of 		
Childhood and Adolescence (3)

The internship shall start with the first week of Semester
VIII and continue for at least eight weeks into the winter
vacation.

PSY204

3.5 Assessment
3.5.1 Assessment of psychology courses shall be based
on any one or combinations of the following: tests,
assignments, written examinations, oral examinations,
practical examinations as approved by the Department.

3.3.2.6 The B.Psych. programme shall consist of core
and optional psychology courses that include lectures,
seminars, laboratory work and supervised practical work
and a research project based on empirical data.
3.3.2.7 The B.Psych. programme shall include a supervised
internship undertaken over six months with a minimum
of 960 hours practical experience.

History and Philosophy of Psychology (3)

Semester 4
Core Courses
PSY208
Statistics for Psychology I (3)

210

Semester 8
Core Course
PSY408
Internship* (18 credits) (Restricted to B.
Psych students only)

3.5.2 Assessment of the performance on the inter ship
shall consist of an evaluation of the intern according to
criteria set by the Department.
3.5.2.1 A student who fails the internship shall be
permitted to repeat the internship only once.
3.5.2.2 A student who, for a good reason, fails to complete
the internship may be awarded an “I” (incomplete) grade
and may, with the consent of the Head of Department
and the Dean of the Faculty, be allowed an additional
period, not exceeding ten weeks, to complete the work.
3.5.3 A student who fails the B.Psych. requirements may
be permitted to continue his/her psychology studies as a
combined major.
3.6 Special Departmental Regulation
Subject to provisions of the General Examination
Regulations, admission to an examination of a course
that contains essential practical components (e.g.PSY305,
PSY306, PSY403, PSY404 and PSY405) shall be subject to
given if students have achieved a class attendance of at
least 80% and a continuous assessment mark of at least
50%. Students who fail to achieve the required minimum
class attendance or continuous assessment mark in
courses with an essential practical component may be
permitted to repeat the course only once.
3.7 Progression from Level to Level
3.7.1 A student who intends to pursue a B.Psych. degree
must achieve an average of at least 60% (Grade Point
3.0) in all core psychology courses at Level 100.
3.7.2 A student who intends to pursue a B.Psych. degree
must achieve an average of at least 60% (Grade Point
3.0) in all core psychology courses at Level 200.
3.7.3 A student who intends to pursue a B.Psych. degree
may be permitted to register for the programme only at
Level 300 but not before.
3.7.3.1 The intake into the B.Psych. programme at Level
300 shall be based on academic merit and restricted to a
specified number of students per annum. The number of
students selected into the B.Psych. programme shall be
determined by the Department from time to time.
3.7.3.2 The criteria for selection into the B.Psych.
programme shall take into consideration academic
performance, performance in a selection interview and
the number of spaces available for practical training.
3.7.3.3 A student who does not meet the requirements
for the B.Psych. programme may be permitted to
continue his/her studies with psychology as a combined
major.
3.8 Award of the Degree
In order to be awarded the B.Psych. degree, a student
must meet the requirements of the Academic General
Regulations, Faculty and Departmental Special
Regulations and obtain a minimum of Grade Point of 3.0
(60%) in the internship.

DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
WORK

General Education Course/Elective (2 or 3 credits) NB: A
student can choose to take a GEC or an Elective course.
Total 17-18 Credits

Diploma in Social Work (DSW) Programme

Entry Requirements.
Subject to the General Regulations 200 and the
Special Regulations of the Faculty of Social Sciences,
the following Special Regulations of the Department
of Social Work shall apply: The normal minimum
requirement is a BGCSE with credit in English or a
Certificate in Social Work from this University or an
equivalent qualification. Students shall be subject to the
guidelines and regulations of the Department’s Fieldwork
Manual.
DSW Programme Structure and Content.
The Diploma in Social Work (DSW) programme has a
total of 72 to 74 credits.
Level 100
Semester 1
DSW100 Introduction to Social Work and its
Literature (3)
DSW101 Social Work with Communities and Groups
(3)
DSW102 Social Services in Botswana (2)
DSW103 Social Work with Youth (2)
DSW104 Social Work in Health Services (3)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
Total 18 credits.
Semester 2
SWF101 Orientation to Fieldwork (1)
DSW105 Social Work with Families and Children (3)
DSW106 Psychology for Social Work (3)
DSW107 Social Work and Disabilities (2)
DSW108 Interpersonal Communication (2)
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
Total 19 credits.
Winter Semester
SWF200 Fieldwork (Block Placement) (3)
Level 200
Semester 1
SWF201 Fieldwork and Professional Development (3)
(pre-requisite SWF200)
DSW200 Introduction to Counselling in Social Work
(3) (pre-requisite DSW106, DSW 108)
DSW201 Introduction to Social Policy (2)
DSW202 Selected Issues in Social Work (2)
DSW205 Probation (3) (pre-requisite DSW101,
DSW105)
General Education Course/Elective (2 or 3 credits)
Total 18/19 credits.
NB: SWF200 is a 12-week block placement in social
welfare agencies that takes place during the long
vacation between Levels 1 and 2.
Semester 2
DSW203 AIDS and Home Based Care (3)
DSW204 Social Work and Social Development (3)
DSW206 Management and Supervision in the Human
Services (3) (pre-requisite DSW102, DSW201)
DSW207 Culture, Change and Social Work in
Botswana (3)
SOC122 The Social Structure of Society (3)

211

Assessment.
Assessment shall be as per General Academic Regulations
00.8. Assessment criteria shall also be stated in each
course outline.
Progression from Semester to Semester.
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as per
General Academic Regulations 00.9.
Award of the Diploma
The award of the Diploma shall be as per General
Regulations 00.852.
Bachelor of Social Work Programme
Entry Requirements.
Subject to the General Regulations 200 and theSpecial
Regulations of the Faculty of Social Sciences,the
following Special Regulations of the
Department of Social Work shall apply:
1. The normal minimum requirement for entry into the
Bachelor of Social Work (BSW) Programme is a credit in
Mathematics.
2. Students shall be subject to the guidelines and
regulations of the Department’s Fieldwork Manual.
3. Applicants with a Diploma in Social Work from
this University or an equivalent qualification with a
minimum grade of a credit shall be eligible for entry at
Level 2 of the first semester of the second year of the
BSW Programme.
BSW Programme Structure and Content.
The BSW programme has a total of 129-137 credits.
Level 100
Semester 1
BSW100 Reading and Writing in Social Work (2)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology (3)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
LAW151 Social Work and Law (3)
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts and
Principles (3)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals I (2)
Total 19 credits.
Semester 2
BSW102 Oral Communication (3)
BSW103 Introduction to Social Welfare (3)
BSW104 Introduction to Social Work (3)
SWF102 Helping in the Community–Fieldwork
Experience (3)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
Total 17 credits.
Level 200.
Semester 1 (Regular Entry)
BSW200 Introduction to Community Work (3) (prerequisite BSW104)
BSW201 Introduction to Working with Families and
Individuals (3) (pre-requisite BSW104)

STA111
Elementary Statistics (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
LAW151 Social Work and Law (3)
General Education Course/Elective (2 or 3 credits)
Total 18-19 credits.
Semester 1 (Direct Entry)
BSW201 Introduction to Working with Families and
Individuals (3) (pre-requisite BSW104)
POL101
Introduction to Political Science (3)
LAW151 Social Work and Law (3)
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3)
ECO111
Basic Microeconomics (3)
General Education Course/Elective (2 or 3 credits)
Total 18-19 credits.

BSW404 Seminar (3)(pre-requisite BSW306)
BSW405 Seminar (3)(pre-requisite BSW306)
or:
BSW406 Research Project I (6)(pre-requisite BSW306)
Plus General Education Course/Elective (3 Credits each)
Total 15 credits.
Semester2
SWF401 Integrative Fieldwork Practice (3)
Students shall take two of the following:
BSW407 Seminar (3) (pre-requisite BSW306)
BSW408 Seminar (3) (pre-requisite BSW306)
BSW409 Seminar (3) (pre-requisite BSW306)
BSW410 Seminar (3) (pre-requisite BSW306) Or:
BSW415 Research Project II (6) and 1 Seminar.
Plus General Education Course/Elective (3 Credits)
Total 15 Credits.

NB: Direct entry students are exempted from BSW200.
Semester 2
SWF101 Orientation to Fieldwork (1)
BSW202 Social Policy (3) (pre-requisite ECO111,
POL101)
BSW203 Social Work and Mental Health (3) (prerequisite PSY101, BSW201)
BSW204 Theory and Social Work Practice (3) (prerequisite BSW103, BSW104)
BSW205 Introduction to Group Work (3)
STA112
Statistical Tools for Social Research (3) (prerequisite STA111)
Total 16 credits.
Winter semester
SWF300 Fieldwork I (Block Placement) (3) (Direct
Entry Students Exempted) (pre-requisite
BSW200, BSW201, BSW203, SWF101)
Level 300
Semester 1
SWF301 Reflective Practice on Fieldwork (2)(prerequisite SWF300)
BSW301 Administration and Change in the Social
Services (3)(pre-requisite BSW202)
BSW302 Counselling (3) (pre-requisite BSW201)
BSW303 Social Work Practice with AIDS (3)(prerequisite BSW200, BSW201, BSW205)
*General Education Course/Elective (2 or 3credits)
Total 16-17 credits.
Semester 2
SWF302 Fieldwork Practice, Culture and Social Work
(2)(pre-requisite BSW200, SWF201)
BSW305 Community with Practice (3)(pre-requisite
BSW200)
BSW306 Research in Social Work (3)(pre-requisite
STA111, STA112)
BSW307 Social Service Planning (3)
*General Education Course/Elective (2 or 3 credits)
Total 15-17 credits.
Winter semester
SWF400 Fieldwork II (Block Placement) (3)(prerequisite SWF300, BSW302, BSW305)
Level 400
Semester 1
SWF402 Linking Theory and Fieldwork (3) (prerequisite SWF400)
BSW401 Supervision in Social Work (3)(pre-requisite
BSW301)
Students shall take one of the following:
BSW402 Seminar (3)(pre-requisite BSW306)
BSW403 Seminar (3)(pre-requisite BSW306)

NB: Students with a minimum of a B average from Level
2 and 3 and a minimum of B average from BSW306 can
choose BSW406 and BSW415 in place of one seminar in
Semester 1 and one seminar in Semester 2.
NB: SWF300 and SWF400 are 9-week fieldwork
placements in social welfare agencies that take place
during the long vacation between Levels 2 and 3 and
Levels 3 and 4 respectively.
Assessment
Assessment shall be as per General Academic Regulations
00.8. Assessment criteria shall also be stated in each
course outline.
Progression from Semester to Semester
Progression from one semester to the next shall be as per
General Academic Regulations 00.9.
Award of the Degree
The award of the Degree shall be as per General
Regulations 00.852.

DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY
Programme Structure
The Department offers Sociology as a subject in the
following Programmes:
1. Single Major Programme leading to the award of
Bachelor of Arts Degree (Sociology)
2. Combined Major/Major Programme leading to the
award of Bachelor of Arts Social Sciences Degree
3. Combined Major/Minor (with Sociology as Minor)
Programme leading to the award of Bachelor of Arts
Social Sciences Degree.
Requirements for the Single Major Degree in Sociology
Only students with a cumulative GPA of at least 3.5
(B-) for all Sociology courses taken during the first and
second years of their studies will be invited to pursue a
single major degree in Sociology. A student pursuing a
single major degree in Sociology must take and pass the
following Sociology courses:
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts and
Principles (3)
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3); or Equivalent
course(s) approved by the Department.

212

Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC125 Theories of Deviance and Crime (3)
SOC130 Crime and Punishment in Modern Society (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Semester 2
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC122 The Social Structure of Society (3)
SOC123 Introduction to Social and Cultural 		
Anthropology (3)
SOC127 Introduction to Penology (3)
SOC133 The History of Punishment in Botswana (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC224 Introduction to Sociological Theory (3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC234 Social Problems in Southern Africa (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
SOC242 Concepts of Health and Illness (3)
SOC245 Gender and the Criminal Justice System (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC226 Concepts and Principles of Social Research
(3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC225 Sociology of Policing (3)
SOC233 Families and Households (3)
SOC241
Social Structure of S. African Societies (3)
SOC243 Crime and Social Justice (3)
SOC246 Communities and Crime (3)
STA241
Statistical Analysis (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (5)
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC322 Classical Sociological Theories (3)
SOC339 Quantitative Research Methods (3)
Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
SOC328 Comparative Social Institutions (3)
SOC329 Urban Sociology (3)
SOC331
Industry and Society (3)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3)
SOC342 Crime and Victimization (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC341
Qualitative Research Methods (3)
Optional Courses
Any four of the following courses:
SOC324 Sociology of Gender (3)
SOC326 Race and Ethnicity (3)
SOC327 Political Sociology (3)
SOC332 Traditional and Alt Medical Systems (3)
SOC335 Rural Sociology (3)
SOC343 Advanced Criminological Theories (3)
CJS324
White Collar Crime (3)
CJS329
Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Justice (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits)

Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC424: African Social Thought (3)
SOC436: Micro Sociological Theories (3)
SOC441: Research Proposal (3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC428 Family and Kinship (3)
SOC431
Sociology of Law (3)
SOC434 Social Movements (3)
SOC432 Work and Occupations (3)
SOC439 Special Topics in Sociology (3)
CJS 422 Management of Criminal Justice 		
Organizations (3)
CJS 424 Domestic and International Security (3)
Electives (3 credits)
Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC421
Contemporary Sociological Theories (3)
SOC422 Research Project (6)
SOC442 Data Analysis and Report Writing (3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC438 The Medical Prof and Allied Occupations (3)
SOC439 Special Topics in Sociology (3)
SOC443 Sentencing Theory and Practice (3)
SOC444 Contemporary Research in Criminology (3)
CJS 423 international Policing (3)
CJS 425 Privatization/Commercialization of Criminal
Justice (3)
CJS 433 Sentencing (3)
CJS 444 Organized Crime (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits)
Requirements for a Combined Major/Major Degree
A student intending to pursue a double major degree
with Sociology as a major subject must take and pass the
following Sociology courses:
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts and
Principles (3)
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3); or Equivalent
course(s) approved by the Department.
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC125 Theories of Deviance and Crime (3)
SOC130 Crime and Punishment in Modern Society (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Semester 2
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC122 The Social Structure of Society (3)
SOC123 Introduction to Social and Cultural 		
Anthropology (3)
SOC127 Introduction to Penology (3)
SOC133 The History of Punishment in Botswana (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC224 Introduction to Sociological Theory (3)

Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC234 Social Problems in Southern Africa (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
SOC242 Concepts of Health and Illness (3)
SOC245 Gender and the Criminal Justice System (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)

SOC444 Contemporary Research in Criminology (3)
Requirements for a Combined Major/Minor [Sociology
Minor]

Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC226 Concepts and Principles of Social Research
(3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC225 Sociology of Policing (3)
SOC233 Families and Households (3)
SOC241
Social Structure of S. African Societies (3)
SOC243 Crime and Social Justice (3)
SOC246 Communities and Crime (3)
STA241
Statistical Analysis (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (5)

Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC121
Introduction to Sociological Concepts and
Principles (3)
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3); or Equivalent
course(s) approved by the Department.

Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC322 Classical Sociological Theories (3)
SOC339 Quantitative Research Methods (3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC328 Comparative Social Institutions (3)
SOC329 Urban Sociology (3)
SOC331
Industry and Society (3)
SOC334 Sociology of Development (3)
SOC342 Crime and Victimization (3)

Semester 2
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC122 The Social Structure of Society (3)
SOC123 Introduction to Social and Cultural 		
Anthropology (3)
SOC127 Introduction to Penology (3)
SOC133 The History of Punishment in Botswana (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)

Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC341
Qualitative Research Methods (3)
Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
SOC324 Sociology of Gender (3)
SOC326 Race and Ethnicity (3)
SOC327 Political Sociology (3)
SOC332 Traditional and Alt Medical Systems (3)
SOC335 Rural Sociology (3)
SOC343 Advanced Criminological Theories (3)
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC441
Research Proposal (3)
Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
SOC424 African Social Thought (3)
SOC428 Family and Kinship (3)
SOC431
Sociology of Law (3)
SOC432 Work and Occupations (3)
SOC434 Social Movements (3)
SOC436 Micro Sociological Theories (3)
SOC439 Special Topics in Sociology (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC421
Contemporary Sociological Theories (3)
SOC442 Data Analysis and Report Writing (3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC438 The Medical Prof and Allied Occupations (3)
SOC439 Special Topics in Sociology (3)
SOC443 Sentencing Theory and Practice (3)

213

A student intending to pursue a degree with Sociology
as a minor subject must take and pass the following
Sociology courses:

Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC125 Theories of Deviance and Crime (3)
SOC130 Crime and Punishment in Modern Society (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)

Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC224 Introduction to Sociological Theory (3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC234 Social Problems in Southern Africa (3)
SOC236 Social Inequality (3)
SOC242 Concepts of Health and Illness (3)
SOC245 Gender and the Criminal Justice System (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC226 Concepts and Principles of Social Research
(3)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC225 Sociology of Policing (3)
SOC233 Families and Households (3)
SOC241
Social Structure of S. African Societies (3)
SOC243 Crime and Social Justice (3)
SOC246 Communities and Crime (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (5)
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC322 Classical Sociological Theories (3)
SOC339 Quantitative Research Methods (3)
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
SOC441
Research Proposal (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
SOC421
Contemporary Sociological Theories (3)
SOC442 Data Analysis and Report Writing (3)

Assessment
Performance shall be evaluated by the combination
of continuous assessment scores (CAS) and final
examination marks; each contributing 50 percent to the
final grade awarded. Seminars, internships and research
projects will be assessed through assignments, term
papers and research reports.
Progression from one Semester to another Semester
Progression from one Semester to the next shall be as per
General Regulation 00.9

Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
CJS227
Criminal Justice Work Experience (3)
CJS223
Media, Crime and Culture (3)
CJS245
Gender, Crime and Justice (3)
SOC234 Social Problems in Southern Africa (3)
BSW201 Introduction to working with Families and
Individuals (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits)

Award of Degree
The award of the degree shall be as per General
Regulation 00.852

Semester 2
Core Courses
CJS222
Basic Concepts and Principles in 		
Criminological Research (3)
SOC246 Communities and Crime (3)

Bachelor of Arts in Criminal Justice Studies (Single Major)
Entry Requirements
Admission to the BA CJS will be as per the University
of Botswana General Regulation 20.2 or successful
completion of the Diploma in Criminal Justice Studies
(DCJ). Applicants who hold the DCJ from the University
of Botswana will be admitted to the third year of the
BA CJS degree programme. These students will be
advised to take three new courses (1 at 1st year level,
and 2 at second year level) as electives in order to satisfy
requirements.
Duration of Programme
The normal duration for the Bachelor of Arts in Criminal
Justice Studies shall be eight (8) semesters on a full-time
basis. Students who are granted exemptions under the
Departmental regulations may be able to complete the
programme in a shorter period of time.
Level 100
Semester 1
Core Courses
CJS121
Introduction to Criminology (3)
SOC125 Theories of Crime and Deviance (3)
LAW131 Introduction to Law (3)
COM151 Communication and Academic Literacy
Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
ICT121
Computer Skills Fundamentals 1 (2)
Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
SOC130 Crime and Punishment in Modern Society (3)
PSY101
Introduction to Psychology
Plus Electives (3 credits) or GEC (4)
Semester 2
Core Courses
STA111
Elementary Statistics (3)
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences) (3)
ICT122
Computer Skills Fundamentals 2 (2)
Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
SOC127 Introduction to Penology (3)
SOC133 The History of Punishment in Botswana (3)
PAD102
Institutional Process of Public 		
Administration (3)
SOC122 Social Structure of Society (3)
Plus GEC (4 credits)
Level 200
Semester 1
Core Courses
CJS221
Classical and Post-Classical Criminological
Theories (3)
LAW234 Constitutional Law (3)

Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
SOC225 Sociology of Policing (3)
SOC243 Crime & Social Justice (3)
LAW 235 Specific Offences in Criminal Law (3)
LAW237 Administrative Law (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits)
Level 300
Semester 1
Core Courses
CJS326
Crime Prevention, Management and Control
(3)
SOC343 Advanced Criminological Theories (3)
LAW333 Criminal Procedure (3)
Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
SOC342 Crime and Victimization (3)
CJS325 Risk Management (3)
CJS328 Psychology of Criminal Behaviour (3)
LAW332 Evidence (4)
SOC324 Sociology of Gender (3)
Semester 2
Core Courses
CJS321
Research Methods in Criminal Justice (3)
CJS322
Policy Analysis in Criminal Justice (3)
CJS323
Criminal Justice Practicum (3)
Optional Courses
Any two of the following courses:
CJS324
White Collar Crime (3)
CJS327
Forensic Criminology (3)
CJS329
Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Justice (3)
PAD307
Human Resource Development (3)
Level 400
Semester 1
Core Courses
CJS426
Electronic Crime (3)
CJS445
Data Analysis in Criminal Justice Studies (3)
Optional Courses
Any Two of the following courses:
CJS422
Management of Criminal Justice 		
Organisations (3)
CJS424
Domestic and International Security (3)
LAW432 Jurisprudence (4)
SOC431
Sociology of Law (3)
Plus Electives (3 credits)
Semester 2
Core Courses
CJS421 Research Project (6)
CJS444 Organised Crime (3)
LAW437 Human Rights Law (3)

214

Optional Courses
Any one of the following courses:
CJS423
International Policing (3)
CJS425
Privatisation/Commercialisation of Criminal
Justice (3)
CJS427
Criminal Offender Profiling (3)
CJS428
Special Topics in Criminal Justice Studies (3)
SOC443 Sentencing Theory & Practice (3)
Progression from one Semester to another Semester
Progression from one Semester to the next shall be as per
General Regulation 00.9
Award of Degree
The award of the degree shall be as per General
Regulation 00.852

DEPARTMENT OF STATISTICS
Diploma in Statistics Programme.
Special Regulations for the Diploma in Statistics
Programme.
Subject to the General Academic Regulations 000 and
100, the following Special Departmental Regulations
shall apply:
1.2 Direct Entry into the Diploma Programme
Students possessing an Ordinary Level pass with grade C
or better in Mathematics, or an additional Mathematics
paper are eligible for direct entry admission to the
Diploma Programme; those who have a credit of C or
better in the extended Mathematics option for BGCSE
are also eligible for admission.
1.3 Duration of the Programme
The normal duration of the Programme is 4 semesters on
a full-time basis carrying a minimum of 64 accumulated
credits for required courses.
1.4 Programme Structure
The core Programme comprises 11 courses in Statistics
totalling 33 credits. In addition, there are 11 optional/
elective courses with 27 credits and 2 General Education
Courses with 4 credits. Students can take electives from
other related disciplines. Students intending to take
BSC statistics later should take the MAT (Mathematics)
option. Those intending to combine Statistics and
Economics should take Economics courses while those
intending to major in Population Studies should take
Population Studies courses.
1.5 Core Courses
Level 100
DST111
Statistical Systems (3.Sem 1)
DST112
Collecting and Organizing Data (3, Sem 1)
DST121
Handling and Analyzing Data Basic (3, Sem
2)
DST122
Presenting Statistical Data and Results (3,
Sem 2)
DST123
Using Prob. Ideas in Dealing with data (3,
Sem 2)
Optional Courses
Semester 1:
Either STA101 Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences I or MAT 111.
Semester 2:
Either STA102 Mathematics for Business and Social
Sciences II or MAT 122.
Elective Courses.

Semester 1:
A 100 Level course from Economics/Populations Studies/
Environmental Science or any other related discipline (3,
sem1)
Semester 2:
A 100 Level course from Economics/Populations Studies/
Environmental Science or any other related discipline (3
sem2)
General Education Courses
Semester 1
COM151 Communication and Academic
Literacy Skills (Social Sciences) (3)
ICDL
International Computer Driver’s License Part
1 (3) or ICT121 (2).

Undergraduate Degree Programmes.
The Department offers Statistics as a subject in the
combined Bachelor of Arts Degree in Social Sciences and
in the Single Major Bachelor of Science Degree for both
the Social Sciences and Science students. In addition
Statistics is offered as a subject for the Combined
Bachelor of Science Degree in Science. For the Diploma
Programme in Statistics see Faculty Regulation 180.
Special Regulations for the Undergraduate Degree
Programmes
Special Regulation for the Combined Bachelor of Arts
Degree in Statistics Subject to the General Academic
Regulations 00.00 and 20.00 the following Departmental
Regulations shall apply:

Semester 2
COM152 Academic and Professional Communication
(Social Sciences)(3)

Entrance Requirements
1. Entrance requirements are subject to the Faculty
General Regulations.

Level 200
Semester 1
DST211
Introduction to Basic Statistical Concepts (3
Sem 1)
DST212
Introduction to Time Series Concepts (3 Sem
1)
DST213
Index Numbers and Economics Statistics (3
Sem 1)
Semester 2
DST221
Statistical Modelling (3 Sem 2)
DST222
Sampling Concepts in Survey Work (3 Sem 2)
DST223
Practical Project (3.Sem 2)

2. Students who have passed the Diploma in Statistics
Examination of this University or who possess the
equivalent qualification can be admitted to Semester 5
of the Programme.

Optional Courses
Must take one course per semester (2 courses, 6 credits)
from any of the following:

Programme Structure

Duration of the Programme
The normal duration for the Bachelor of Arts Degree in
Statistics Programme shall be 8 semesters on a full-time
basis. Students, who were granted exemption under the
Departmental Regulations, may be able to complete the
Programme in a shorter period of time.

Subject to General Regulation 20.00 and the relevant
Special Regulations, the following Department of
Statistics Special Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
1 Students who are admitted to the Faculty of Science
and who have passed each of the 2 required Level 100
Statistics and Mathematics courses are eligible to join
the Bachelor of Science (Statistics) Single Major Degree
Programme. The specific combined major programme on
the optional courses (MAT/ECO/POP etc) taken during the
diploma.
2 Students admitted to other faculties, such as the
Faculty of Social Sciences, who have passed each of the
2 required Level 100 Statistics and Mathematics courses
are eligible to join the Bachelor of Science (Statistics)
Single Major Degree Programme. The decision as to
what major is to be taken should be made as early as
possible, preferably not later than Semester 5 of the
undergraduate studies.
3 Students who have passed the Diploma in Statistics
examination of this University with a credit or who
possess equivalent qualifications can join at level 3
or Semester 5 of the Programme on condition of the
Departmental recommendation.
4 Students who intend to join the Single Major
Programme are normally expected to complete the
courses listed under the Department of Statistics Special
Regulation 1.3.3 before Semester 5 of study.
Duration of the Programme

Semester 1
MAT221/POP201/ECO211/STA201
Semester 2
MAT212/POP223/STA 212/ECO212
Elective Courses
Semester 1:
A 200 Level course from Economics/Populations Studies/
Environmental Science or any other related discipline (3,
sem1)
Semester 2:
A 200 Level course from Economics/Populations Studies/
Environmental Science or any other related discipline (3
sem2)
Assessment
Unless otherwise specified the mode of delivery and
learning objectives for this programme does not follow
the usual conventions of teach test and examine. Some
courses are theory based; some are more practical and
interactive while others require some degree of field
work and report writing. Hence the details on how each
course shall be assessed are shown under the course
description.

1 At Levels 100 and 200, the Statistics part of the
Programme requires 10 core courses in Statistics totalling
29 credits, normally taken during the first 4 semesters. In
addition courses from the other major as well as electives
and General Education Courses are required as per
Faculty Regulations. Core courses are listed in Sections
1.4.1, 1.4.2 and 1.4.3.
2 At Levels 300 and 400, the Statistics part of the
Programme consists of 8 core courses in Statistics
totalling 24 credits normally taken in Semester 5 and
upwards. In addition, students are required to take 12
credits of optional courses and 4 credits of General
Education Courses. Core and optional courses are given
in Sections 1.4.1, 1.4.2, and 1.4.3.
Assessment
Normally the assessment for any course is based on the
continuous assessment and the final examination in the
ratio of 1:2, unless otherwise specified.

The normal duration for the Bachelor of Science
Degree Programme shall be 8 semesters on a fulltime basis. Students who join under Departmental
Special Regulation 4.6.1.3 may be able to complete the
Programme in a shorter period.
Programme Structure
1 At Levels 100 and 200, the Programme requires 11
core courses in Statistics and Mathematics totalling 37
credits, normally to be taken during the first 4 semesters.
In addition students are expected to take elective and
General Educations Courses as required by their Faculty
Regulations.
2 At Levels 300 and 400, the Programme consists of 15
core courses in Statistics and Mathematics totalling 48
credits that are usually taken from Semester 5 upwards.
In addition, there are 3 optional Statistics courses to be
taken totalling 9 credits.
Assessment

Award of Bachelor of Arts Degree
A student who has completed the entire core, optional,
elective and General Education Courses as listed above
shall be eligible for the award of the Bachelor of Arts
Combined Degree in Statistics.

Normally assessment of any course is based on the
continuous assessment and the examination in the
ratio 1:2, unless otherwise specified in the Departmental
Special Regulations.
Award of Bachelor of Science in Statistics Degree

Bachelor of Science in Statistics Degree
Award of Diploma
A student shall be eligible for the award of the Diploma
in Statistics after completing a minimum of 64 credits
for courses specified in section 7.3.
Classification of the Diploma
The award of the Diploma shall be classified as
Distinction, Merit, Credit or Pass, according to the GPA
as per General Regulation 10.4.

The Single Major Bachelor of Science Programme can be
taken by students from the Faculty of Science as well as
students from the Faculty of Social Sciences or any other
faculty, provided they satisfy the requirements outlined
below.

A student who has completed all core, optional, elective
and General Education Course requirements shall
be eligible for the award of the Bachelor of Science
(Statistics) Degree.
Classification of Degree

Special Regulations for the Single Major Bachelor of
Science in Statistics Degree

215

The award shall be classified according to the GPA as per

General Regulation 20.4.
Combined Bachelor of Science Degree
The Combined Major Bachelor of Science Degree
Programmes are for students who take Statistics as a
major with any other subject major from the Faculty of
Science.
Special Regulations for the Combined Major Bachelor of
Science in Statistics Degree.
The Programme will be offered under the General
Regulations of the University, the Faculty of Science
Special Regulations, which allows Statistics as one of
the subjects available to the students at Level 100, and
the Department of Statistics Special Regulations. Subject
to General Regulation 20.00 and the relevant Faculty of
Science Special Regulations, the following Department
of Statistics Special Regulations shall apply:
Entrance Requirements
1 The Faculty of Science students can take Statistics as a
Major subject combined with any other Science subject.
In order to take Statistics as a Major the student should
have passed the 2 relevant Level 100 courses in Statistics.
The decision as to what major to take is to be made as
early as possible, preferably not later than Semester 5.
2 Students who intend to join the Bachelor of Science
Combined Major Programme in Statistics are normally
expected to complete the courses listed under the
Department of Statistics Special Regulation 1.3.2 before
Semester 5.
Duration of the Programme
The normal duration for the Bachelor of Science
Combined Major Degree in Statistics Programme shall be
8 semesters on a full-time basis.
Programme Structure
1 At Levels 100 and 200, the Statistics component of the
Combined Major requires 8 core courses in Statistics and
Mathematics totalling 28 credits normally taken during
the first 4 semesters. In addition courses from the other
major as well as electives and General Education Courses
are required as per General Academic Regulations.
2 At Levels 300 and 400, the Statistics part of the
Programme consists of 8 core courses in Statistics
totalling 24 credits, normally for Semester 5 and
upwards. In addition, there are 3 optional courses in
Statistics totalling 9 credits to be taken during the
same period. Courses from the other major, Electives
and General Education Courses will supplement the
Programme structure.
Assessment
Normally assessment of any course is based on the
continuous assessment and the examination in the ratio
1:2, unless specified otherwise in the Department of
Statistics Special Regulations.
Award of the Combined Bachelor of Science Degree
1 A student who has successfully completed the entire
core, optional, elective and General Education Courses
shall be eligible for the award of the Bachelor of Science
Combined Major Degree.

2 Classification of Degree
The award shall be classified according to the CGPA, as
per General Regulation 20.4.
Combined Bachelor of Arts Degree in Statistics
Level 100
At Level 100 a student majoring in the Combined
Bachelor of Arts Degree in Statistics shall take:
Semester 1
STA101
Mathematics for Social Sciences I (3)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4,)
At Level 100 a student intending to major in Statistics in
the Bachelor of Science Programme shall take:
Semester 1
MAT111
Introductory Concepts of Mathematics I (4)
STA116
Introduction to Statistics (4)
Semester 2
STA102
Mathematics for Social Sciences II (3) (prerequisite STA101)
STA121
Elements of Probability (2)
At Level 100 a student intending to major in Statistics in
the Bachelor of Science Programme shall take:
Semester 2
MAT122 Introductory Concepts of Mathematics II
(4, Sem 2)
STA122
Introductory Concepts of Probability) (prerequisite STA116) (4, Sem 2)
General Education Courses
Two GEC courses as required for the Faculty (2+2 credits)
in semester one.
Two GEC courses as required by the Faculty (2+2 credits)
in semester two.
Level 200
At Level 200 a student majoring in Statistics for the
Combined Bachelor of Arts Degree in Social Sciences
shall take:
Semester 1
STA201
Elementary Calculus (3) (pre-requisite
STA101 & STA102)
STA221
Statistical Distributions I (3) (pre-requisite
STA121)
Semester 2
STA202
Matrix Algebra (3) (pre-requisite STA102)
STA222
Probability I (3) (pre-requisite STA121)
STA211
Statistical Methods (3) (pre-requisite STA221)
STA272
Statistical Computing (3, Semester 1 and 2)

Optional Courses.
One 200 level courses from Mathematics/Computer Sc/
Econ/ Pop. Studies/Env. Science (3, Sem3)
One 200 level course from Math/Comp.Sc/ Econ/Pop.
Studies/ Env. Science (3, Sem 4)
At Level 200 a student majoring in Statistics for the
Single Major Bachelor of Science Degree shall take:
Semester 1
MAT221 Calculus I (3)
STA221
Statistical Distributions I (3)
Semester 2
MAT222 Calculus II (3)
STA211
Statistical Methods (3)
STA222
Probability I (3)
STA272
Statistical Computing (3, Sem 1&2)
Optional Course
1. Two 200 level courses from Math/Comp Sc/Econ/ Pop.
Studies/Env. Science (3+3 credits)
2. A 200 level course from Math/Comp.Sc/ Econ/Pop.
Studies/ Env.Science (3)
Electives
One 200 level course (2 or 3)
General Education Courses
One GEC course (2)
Levels 300
At Level 300, a student majoring in Statistics for the
Combined Bachelor of Arts Degree shall take:
Semester 1
Core Courses
STA321
Statistical Distributions II (3) (pre-requisite
STA221 OR (DST211 & DST221)
STA354
Survey Research Methods (3)
STA352
Regression and Linear Models (3) (prerequisite STA202 & 211)
Semester 2
STA322
Probability II (3,)
STA353
Experimental Design I (3)
Optional Courses (2 courses, 6 credits)
Semester 1
STA361
Time Series Analysis (3) (pre-requisiteSTA211)
STA381
Statistical Quality Control (3) (pre-requisite
STA221)
Semester 2
Choose one course (3 credits)
STA382
Operations Research I (3)
STA384
Economic Statistics (3)
STA391
Field Survey (3)
At Level 300, a student majoring in Statistics for the
Combined Major Bachelor of Science Degree shall take:

General Education Courses
One GEC course (2 credits)
At Level 200 a student majoring in Statistics for the
Combined Bachelor of Science Degree shall take:
Semester 1
STA221
Statistical Distributions I (3,)
STA272
Statistical Computing (3, Sem 1&2)
MAT212 Introduction to Algebra (3)
Semester 2
STA222
Probability I (3)
STA211
Statistical Methods (3) (pre-requisite STA221
OR (DST211 & DST221)

216

Semester 1
Core Courses
STA321
Statistical Distributions II (3) (pre-requisite
STA221)
STA352
Regression and Linear Models (3) (prerequisite STA202 & STA211)
STA354
Survey Research Methods (3)
Semester 2
STA322
Probability II (3) ) (pre-requisite STA222)
STA353
Experimental Design I (3) ) (pre-requisite
STA351 & STA352)
Optional Courses (3 courses, 9 credits)

Semester 1
STA361
Time Series Analysis (3, Sem 1)
STA381
Statistical Quality Control (3, Sem 1) (prerequisite STA221 OR (DST211 & DST221)
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3, Sem 1)
Semester 2
STA382
Operations Research I (3) (pre-requisite
STA202)
STA383
Econometric Methods (3) (pre-requisite
STA202)
STA391
Field Survey (3) (pre-requisite STA354)
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3)
At Level 300 A student majoring in Statistics for the
Single Major Bachelor of Science Degree shall take:
Semester 1
Core Courses
MAT321 Real Analysis I (3)
STA321
Statistical Distributions II (3)
STA352
Regression and Linear Models (3)
STA354
Survey Research Methods (3)
Semester 2
STA302
Linear Algebra for Statistics (3)
STA322
Probability II (3)
STA353
Experimental Design (3)
STA391
Field Survey (3)
Optional Courses (3 courses, 9 credits)
Semester 1
STA381
Statistical Quality Control (3)
STA361
Time Series Analysis (3)
Semester 2
MAT322 Real Analysis II (3)
STA382
Operations Research I (3)
STA383
Econometric Methods (3)
STA384
Economic Statistics (3)
Level 400
At Level 400, a student majoring in Statistics for the
Combined Bachelor of Arts Degree shall take:
STA431
STA453
STA432

Theory of Estimation (3, Sem 1) (prerequisite STA322)
Sampling Theory and Applications (3, Sem 1)
Theory of Hypothesis Testing (3, Sem 2) )
(pre-requisite STA431)

Optional Courses (2 courses, 6 credits)
Semester 1
Choose One From
STA421
Multivariate Distributions (3) (pre-requisite
STA321)
STA461
Elements of Stochastic Process (3)
STA481
Operations Research II (3) (pre-requisite
STA382)
STA483
Health Statistics (3) ) (pre-requisite STA211)
STA490
Research Project (6, Sem 1 and 2) (will be
allowed for exceptionally motivated
students). (pre-requisite STA321 & STA354)
Semester 2
Choose One From
STA433
Introduction to Bayesian Inference (3) (prerequisite STA431)
STA471
Multivariate Data Analysis (3)
STA482
Agricultural Statistics (3)
STA484
Design and Analysis of Clinical Trials (3)
STA490
Research Project (6, Sem 1 and 2) (will be
allowed for exceptionally motivated

students). (pre-requisite STA321 & 354)
At Level 400, a student majoring in Statistics for the
Combined Major Bachelor of Science Degree shall take:

STA451
STA353)
STA452
STA462

STA421
STA431
STA432

Multivariate Distributions (3)
Theory of Estimation (3)
Theory of Hypothesis Testing (3, Sem 2)

Optional Courses (3 courses, 9 credits)
Semester 1
Choose at least One From
STA461
STA483
STA490

Elements of Stochastic Process (3) (prerequisite STA322)
Health Statistics (3)
Research Project (6, Sem 1 and 2) (will be
allowed for exceptionally motivated
students). (pre-requisite STA321 & 354)

Semester2
Choose at least One From
STA433
Introduction to Bayesian Inference (3)
STA451
Experimental Design II (3) (pre-requisite
STA353)
STA452
Introduction to Generalized Linear (prerequisite STA321 & STA352) Model (3)
STA453
Sampling Theory and Applications (3) (prerequisite STA354)
STA462
Applied Stochastic Process (3) (pre-requisite
STA461)
STA471
Multivariate Data Analysis (3) (pre-requisite
STA272 & STA421)
STA482
Agricultural Statistics (3) (pre-requisite
STA353 & STA354)
STA484
Design and Analysis of Clinical Trials (3)
(pre-requisite STA211)
STA490
Research Project (6 credits, Semesters 1 and
2) (will be allowed for exceptionally
motivated students) (pre-requisite STA321 &
354)
At Level 400 A student majoring in Statistics for the
Single Major Bachelor of Science Degree shall take:
Semester 1
Core Courses
STA421
Multivariate Distributions (3)
STA431
Theory of Estimation (3)
STA453
Sampling Theory and Applications (3)
STA490
Research Project (6 credits, Semesters 1 and
2) (will be allowed for exceptionally
motivated students) (pre-requisite STA321 &
354)
Semester 2
Core Courses
STA461
Elements of Stochastic Process (3)
STA432
Theory of Testing of Hypothesis (3)
STA433
Introduction to Bayesian Inference (3)
STA490
Research Project (6 credits, Semesters1 and
2) (will be allowed for exceptionally
motivated students) (pre-requisite STA321 &
354)
Optional Courses (2 courses, 6 credits)
Semester 1
Choose One from
STA483
Health Statistics (3)
STA481
Operations Project II
Semester 2
Choose One from

217

STA471
STA482
STA484

Experimental Design II (3) (pre-requisite
Introduction to Generalized Linear Model
(pre-requisite STA321 & STA352 (3)
Applied Stochastic Process (3) (pre-requisite
STA461)
Multivariate Data Analysis (3)
Agricultural Statistics (3) (pre-		
requisiteSTA353 & STA354)
Design and Analysis of Clinical Trials (3)
(pre- requisite STA211)

ACT

AND

STATUTES

ACT AND STATUTES
CHAPTER. 57:01 UNIVERSITY OF BOTSWANA ACT

UNIVERSITY OF BOTSWANA ACT

- 217

PART XXI PLANNING AND RESOURCES 		
COMMITTEE		
- 222

UNIVERSITY OF BOTSWANA STATUTES - 217
PART XXII ACADEMIC POLICY REVIEW
		 AND PLANNING COMMITTEE

REVIEW COMMITTEES

- 226

FACULTY APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS
AND REVIEW COMMITTEES
- 226
- 222

PART I 		 PRELIMINARY		

- 217

PART II

MEETINGS OF COUNCIL

- 217

PART III

THE UNIVERSITY SEAL

- 217

PART IV

APPOINTMENT OF 			
THE VICE CHANCELLOR
- 218

PART XXIV EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES
		 OF BOARDS, SCHOOLS,
		 INSTITUTES OR CENTRES

APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY VICE
CHANCELLORS		
- 218

PART XXV EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES
		 OF FACULTY BOARDS		

- 224

MISCELLANEOUS			- 227

AUDITOR			

PART XXVI EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF
		 THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES
				- 224

PART XXXVI TERMS AND CONDITIONS
		
OF SERVICE OF MEMBERS OF 		
UNIVERSITY STAFF		
- 227

PART XXVII EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OF 		
INSTITUTES OR CENTRES
- 224

PART XXXVII STUDENTS
REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL		

- 227

PART XXVIII DEANS OF FACULTIES
		 AND SCHOOLS, AND DIRECTORS
		 OF INSTITUTES AND CENTRES - 224

PART XXXVIII SECURITY		

- 228

PART XXIX DEPUTY DEANS OF FACULTIES - 224

PART XXXX AMENDMENTS TO STATUTES - 228

PART XXIII BOARDS OF FACULTIES, SCHOOLS,
INSTITUTES AND CENTRES
- 223

APPOINTMENT, PROMOTION AND REVIEW
OF ACADEMIC STAFF IN INSTITUTES OR
CENTRES				- 227
SUPPORT STAFF APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS
AND REVIEW COMMITTEES		
- 227

- 224
SPECIAL APPOINTMENTS		

PART V
PART VI

- 218

PART VII EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF 		
COUNCIL			-218
PART VIII AUDIT COMMITTEE		

- 218

PART IX

FINANCE COMMITTEE

- 218

PART X HUMAN RESOURCES
		 COMMITTEE		

- 218

PART XI PHYSICAL RESOURCES
		 COMMITTEE		

- 218

PART XII STAFF APPOINTMENTS AND 		
PROMOTIONS COMMITTEE		
- 220

PART XXX APPOINTMENTS OF DEANS, DEPUTY
DEANS AND DIRECTORS OF
		 INSTITUTES OR CENTRES
- 224

PART XIII STAFF APPEALS COMMITTEE

- 220

PART XXXI APPOINTMENT OF THE
		 DEAN OF THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE
STUDIES			- 225

PART XIV VICE CHANCELLOR		

- 220

PART XXXII DEPARTMENTAL BOARDS

- 225

PART XV DEPUTY VICE CHANCELLORS

- 221

PART XXXIII HEADS OF ACADEMIC
		
DEPARTMENTS		

- 226

PART XVI SENATE			

- 221

PART XVII EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF SENATE
				- 222

PART XXXIV AFFILIATED AND ASSOCIATE 		
INSTITUTIONS		
- 226
		 ASSOCIATE INSTITUTIONS

PART XIX HONORARY DEGREES		

- 226

- 222
PART XXXV APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND

PART XX ACADEMIC HONOURS COMMITTEE		
-222

218

- 227

PART XXXIX ORDINANCES/REGULATIONS - 228

UNIVERSITY OF BOTSWANA ACT

ACT

University of Botswana Act, 2008
No15 of 2008.
An Act to re-enact the University
of Botswana Act with substantial
revisions of the governance structures
of the University and matters incidental
thereto.
Date of assent: 28.08.2008
Date of Commencement:
ON NOTICE ENACTED by the Parliament
of Botswana.
PART I -Preliminary
Short title and commencement
1. This Act may be cited as the University of Botswana
Act, 2008, and shall come into operation on such a date
as the Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette,
appoint.

Interpretation
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “Council” means the University Council established
under section 9;
“member” means a member of the Council; “Minister”
means the Minister of Education and Skills Development;
“Statutes” means the statutes enacted under section 22;
“University” means the University of Botswana
established under section 3.

PART II -Establishment of University of Botswana
Continuance of University
3. (1) The University of Botswana, established in terms of
section 2 of the Act repealed under section 23, shall
continue to exist as if established under this Act.
(2) The University shall be a body corporate with
perpetual succession and common seal, capable of
suing and being sued in its own name and, subject
to the provisions of this Act, performing such acts as
bodies corporate may by law perform.

Functions of University
4. The functions of the University shall include the
following –
(a) providing higher education and training;
(b) advancing and disseminating knowledge through
teaching;
(c) undertaking, promoting and facilitating research and
scholarly investigations;
(d) supporting and contributing to the realisation of
economic and social development of the nation;
(e) contributing to the cultural and social life of the
community; and
(f) contributing to the advancement of the intellectual
and human resource capacity of the international
community.

Powers of University
5.
(1) The University shall have the power to do all
things necessary or expedient for exercising and
discharging its functions subject to this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the University
shall have the power to(a) provide programmes and courses of study, conduct
examinations and other methods of assessment, and
award degrees and other qualifications;
(b) establish relationships and collaborate with other
persons or bodies, or other institutions of learning,
higher education, training or research, within or
outside Botswana, upon such terms as may be

provided in the Statutes;
(c) establish or participate in the establishment of
trading, research or other co-operations as may be
necessary in the discharge of its functions;
(d) collaborate with business, professional, cultural, social
or other interests within and outside Botswana as
may be necessary in the discharge of its functions;
(e) collaborate with alumni and associations of alumni
and graduates of the University;
(f) receive and accept donations on such terms and
conditions as shall not be inconsistent with this Act
and the functions of the University;
(g) maintain, manage, administer and invest funds in a
manner which shall not be inconsistent with this Act
and the functions of the University; and
(h) acquire and hold movable or immovable property, sell,
lease, mortgage or otherwise alienate or dispose of
the property, and enter into other transactions.
(3) Where the University has resolved that it is necessary
or expedient to acquire a property under subsection
(2) (h), the property may be treated as property
required for public purposes, and the Acquisition of
Property Act shall apply with necessary modifications
to allow for the vesting of the property acquired in
the University and for the cost to be defrayed by the
University.

PART 111- Governance of University
Principal officers and governance bodies
6. The Principal officers and the governance bodies of the
University shall be (a) Chancellor;
(b) Chairperson of the University Council;
(c) Vice-Chancellor;
(d) University Council;
(e) Senate; and
(f) Deputy Vice-Chancellors

Chancellor
7. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the President
of Botswana,
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for five years and
shall be eligible for one more term of five years.
(3) The Chancellor shall be the titular head of the
University and shall be its ambassador, promoting
goodwill and mobilising resources for the University.
(4) The Chancellor shall preside over ceremonial
assemblies of the University, confer awards of the
University and, perform and exercise other functions
and powers as described in this Act and in the
Statutes,
(5) In the absence of the Chancellor, the Chairperson of
the Council shall act as Chancellor.

Vice-Chancellor
8. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Minister after consulting the University Council and
the Senate.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the chief executive
officer of the - University with overall responsibility
for academic and administrative leadership as well
as chief disciplinary officer of the University, subject
to directions of policy that the University may give
from time to time.
(3) The Council shall, in consultation with the Senate,
appoint Deputy Vice-Chancellors in accordance
with the Statutes,
(4) When the post of Vice-Chancellor is vacant, or when
the Vice- Chancellor is absent, or for any reason
unable to perform the functions of Vice-Chancellor,
the Council shall appoint, in accordance with the
Statutes, one of the Deputy Vice-Chancellors, or if
no Deputy Vice-Chancellor is available, any other

219

AND

STATUTES

suitable member of the University staff, to act as
Vice- Chancellor,
(5) The Vice-Chancellor and the Deputy Vice-Chancellors
shall together constitute an executive management
team to provide executive leadership to the
University.

Establishment of Council
9.(1) There shall be established the University Council
which shall consist of the following 32 members (a) 12 people appointed by the Minister, five of whom
shall be appointed by the Minister at his or her
discretion and seven on the recommendation of the
Council;
(b) seven people representative of civil society and the
private sector, appointed by the Chancellor on the
recommendation of Council in accordance with the
procedure and criteria specified in the Statutes;
(c) two people who are not resident in Botswana
appointed by the University Council by reason of
their special knowledge and competence in tertiary
education;
(d) one graduate of the University and its antecedents
who is not a member of staff of the University
elected by the Alumni Association of the University;
(e) the Vice-Chancellor and Deputy Vice-Chancellors;
(f) two members of Senate elected by Senate, one of
whom shall be a professor and the other a Dean of
Faculty;
(g) one member of the academic staff who is not on
Senate, elected by members of academic staff; (h)
two members of the support staff elected by the
support staff, one of whom shall be a senior member
of staff; (i) one student elected by the student body
of the University.
(2) The procedure for election of members under
paragraphs (d), (f), (g), {h) and (i) of subsection (1)
shall be prescribed in the Statutes.
(3) A member shall be responsible to the Council and
not to the entity that appointed or elected the
member and shall have a duty to act in good faith,
avoid conflict of interest and, to exercise skill and
judgment in the interest of the University.
(4) A member shall have collective responsibility for the
decisions of the Council.

Chairperson of Council
10.(1) The Minister shall appoint the Chairperson
of Council and members shall elect the ViceChairperson from amongst those members that are
not employees or students of the University.
2) The Chairperson of the Council shall(a) provide leadership to the Council;
(b) conduct meetings of Council;
(c) act as the representative and spokesperson of
Council; and
(d) subject to restrictions and directions of the Council,
act for and make decisions on behalf of the Council
where it is not feasible or practicable to convene a
meeting of the Council for that purpose.
(3) The Vice-Chairperson of the Council shall act as
Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson.

Functions of Council
11. (1) The Council shall be the governing body with
ultimate responsibility for ensuring the performance
of the University in accordance with the powers
conferred by this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the Council shall(a) set the strategic directions of the University by
overseeing the development and adoption of the
mission and strategic plans of the University;
(b) approve major policies, capital plans, and the annual
planning and budget report;

ACT

AND

STATUTES

(c) monitor and review the overall performance of
the University in relation to plans, policies, values,
academic standards, financial management and
buildings and estates management;
(d) approve the annual report and annual statement of
accounts of the University;
(e) ensure the strategic leadership of the University;
(f) enhance the engagement between the University and
the community;
(g) approve the institutional plan of the University; and
(h) maintain, through Senate, high levels of academic
standards.

Powers of Council
12. (1) The Council shall have the power to do or provide
for any act or thing which it considers necessary or
expedient for the performance or exercise of its
powers and functions under this Act,
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the Council shall(a) determine persons who are authorised to sign
contracts, cheques and other documents on behalf
of the University, and otherwise regulate procedure
in relation to transactions entered into by the
University;
(b) provide for the safe custody and proper use of the
seal of the University; and
(c) approve terms and conditions of service for employees
of the University,
(3) The Council may, where it deems it necessary or
desirable, prohibit the admission of a person as a
student of the University.
(4) The Council shall exercise the powers under
subsection (3) notwithstanding the disciplinary
powers conferred on the Vice-Chancellor by section
8(2),
(5) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on any
other person or public officer under any other law,
the Council shall have the power, after consultation
with the Minister and the Senate, to declare the
University closed for purposes of offering some or all
academic programmes and courses and, whenever
possible, indicate the period during which the
University shall remain closed,
(6) Notwithstanding subsection (5), where there is an
emergency, the Chairperson shall have the power
to act on behalf of the Council and order the
Univ2ersity closed.

Accounts and annual reports
13, (1) The Council shall cause the accounts of the
University to be annual report drawn up, audited and
published annually and at such times and in such
manner as the Minister may direct,
(2) The Council shall cause, within six months after the
end of each academic year, a report of the activities
of the University to be drawn up and made available
to the public.
(3) The Council shall, within 30 days of receiving a copy
of the audited accounts and the report give such
copy and report to the Minister.
(4) The Minister shall, within 90 days of receiving the
report and a copy
of the audited accounts, lay such report and accounts
before the National Assembly.

Tenure of office for members
14. (1) The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Council
shall hold office for a period of three years and shall
be eligible for re-election for one more term.
(2) All appointed or elected members, other than the
member elected by the student body of the University,
shall hold office for a period not exceeding three
years and shall be eligible for reappointment or re

election for one more term at the end of the first
period.
(3) The member elected by the student body shall hold
office for a period not exceeding one year and shall
be eligible for re-election for one more term.

Disqualification, removal and resignation of
member
15, (1) A person shall not be appointed, or elected
a member or be qualified to continue to hold
office,who
(a)in terms of a law In force in any country(i) been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt and
has not been discharged; or
(ii) made an assignment, arrangement or composition
with his or her creditors, which has not been
rescinded or set aside;
(b) within a period of 10 years immediately preceding
the date of his or her appointment, been convicted (i) of a criminal offence in any country; or
(ii) of a criminal offence for which he or she has not
received a free pardon and notwithstanding that the
sentence has been suspended, which, if committed in
Botswana, would have been committed, the penalty
for which would be at least six months imprisonment
without the option of a fine,
(2) The Council may remove a member from office after
consultation with the appointing authority if the
member(a) is absent without reasonable cause from three
consecutive meetings of the Council of which the
member has had notice;
(b) is inefficient;
(c) has been found to be physically or mentally incapable
of performing his or her duties efficiently; or
(d) contravenes this Act, Statutes, or other instruments
stipulating the duties and responsibilities of
members, or otherwise misconducts himself or
herself to the detriment of the objectives of the
Council.
(3) A member may resign from office by giving 30 days
notice in writing to the person or officer designated
in the Statutes as the Secretary to the Council,
(4) The office of a member shall become vacant after(a) a period of 30 days from the date the member is
convicted of an offence referred to under subsection
(1) (b), where the member does not appeal;
(b) a period of 30 days from the date a ruling against the
member is made on an appeal made in respect of a
conviction against the member under subsection (1)
(b), where the member appeals;
(c) a period of 30 days has elapsed from the date the
member gave notice in writing of his or her intention
to resign in accordance with subsection (3);
(d) a period of 30 days has elapsed from the date the
member is given notice in writing by the Council to
vacate office; or
(e) a member is summarily required by the Council
to vacate office on the grounds referred to in
subsection (2) (d),
(5) Where the office of a member becomes vacant
before the expiry of the member’s term of office, the
Secretary shall initiate the process of appointing or
,electing a replacement who shall hold office for a
full term,

Meetings of Council
16. (1) Subject to this Act and the Statutes, the Council
shall regulate its own proceedings.
(2) The Council shall meet at least three times in an
academic year,
(3) The Chairperson may, upon giving a written notice
of not less than 14 days, and upon a written request

220

of not less than one half of the members, call a
meeting,
(4) The Chairperson may, where the urgency of the
matter does not permit giving notice as required in
paragraph (a), call a special meeting of the Council,
giving a shorter notice,
(5) The Chairperson shall preside at any meeting of
Council, but in the absence of the Chairperson the
Vice-Chairperson shall preside, and in the absence
of both the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the
members present shall elect one of them, not being
an employee or student of the University, to preside
at that meeting.
(6) The quorum at any meeting of Council shall be one
half of the members.
(7)
A decision of the Council on any question shall
be taken by the majority of the members present
and voting at that meeting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a
casting vote in addition to that person’s deliberative
vote.
(8) The Council may invite any person whose presence
it considers necessary, to attend and to participate
in the deliberations of the Council, but such person
shall have no vote.

Disclosure of interest
17. (1) A member who has a direct or an indirect interest
in a private capacity in any matter to be considered
by the Council or a committee of Council shall,
as soon as practicable after the commencement
of the meeting, disclose the interest and shall not,
unless the Council otherwise directs, take part in
any consideration or discussion of, or vote on, any
question relating to the matter.
(2) A disclosure of interest made under this section shall
be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which
it is made,
(3) Where a member fails to disclose his or her interest
in accordance with subsection (1) and a decision
by the committee is made which benefits ‘-. such
member directly, such decision shall be null and void,
(4)
A member who contravenes the provisions of
subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable
to a fine not exceeding P6 000, or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months, or to both.

Confidentiality
18.(1)
Every member and any person co-opted
to a committee shall observe and preserve the
confidentiality of all matters coming before a
committee, and such confidentiality shall subsist
even after the termination of his or her term of
office or his or her co-option
(2) A person to whom confidential information is revealed
through working with a committee shall not disclose
that information to any other person unless he or
she is required to do so in terms of any written law
or for purposes of any judicial proceedings.
(3) A member or an expert engaged to render services
that may include access to confidential information
shall not, for a period of two years after leaving
office or rendering such expert service, use to their
personal advantage information acquired by him or
her by virtue of being associated with a committee.
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a
fine not exceeding P6 000, or to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 12 months, or to both, and
for a second or subsequent offence to a fine not
exceeding P10 000, or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years, or to both.

ACT
Committees of Council

Savings

19. (1) The Council shall have the following committees
whose terms Commttees of of reference and
membership shall be as specified in the Statutes –
(a) the Executive Committee of Council;
(b) the Joint Committee of the Council and the Senate;
(c) the Audit Committee;
(d) the Finance Committee;
(e) the Human Resources Committee;
(f) the Staff Appeals Committee; and
(g) the Physical Resources Committee.
(2) The Council may from time to time establish
other Committees of a special or general nature,
consisting of its members or other suitably qualified
persons, as it may deem fit.
(3) The Council may delegate any of its functions under
this Act to a committee established in terms of
subsection (2).
(4) The provisions of sections 16 and 17 shall, with
necessary modifications, apply to a member of a
committee.

25. (1) All Statutes, rules, ordinances and regulations
made under the repealed Act shall, to the extent
consistent with this Act, and until otherwise
provided for in terms of this Act, continue to apply
and have effect.
(2) All principal officers, the Council and the Senate
appointed under the repealed Act shall continue
to hold and perform the duties and exercise the
powers conferred under the repealed Act until they
are replaced by officers and governance structures
provided for in this Act.

Remuneration and Allowances
20.

A member may be paid remuneration and
allowances, if any, as Government may from time to
time determine.

Senate
21. (1) There shall be a Senate which shall have overall
responsibility for the (i) academic policies and academic plans,
(ii) academic development strategy, and
(iii) research and community service functions of the
University.
(2) The Senate shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor and
such other members as shall be specified in the
Statutes.
The Senate shall (a) have control and direction of teaching, research,
assessment, conferment of degrees and granting of
other awards of the University;
(b) be responsible for the integration of academic,
financial and physical plans through the annual
planning and budget report;
(c) be responsible for articulating the objectives, goals,
mission and strategic direction of the University for
approval by the Council;
(d) be responsive to requests of Council and regularly
monitor its own performance; and
(e) establish committees of the Senate and regulate their
membership as it sees fit.
(4) The Senate shall have such other functions and
powers as shall from time to time be specified in the
Statutes.

PART IV - General
Indemnity
22. No matter or thing done or omitted to be done by
a member or a member of a committee shall, if the
matter or thing is done or omitted to be done bona
fide in the course of operations of the Council or
a committee, render a member or a member of a
committee personally liable for an action, claim or
demand.

Statutes
23. The Council, acting in consultation with the Senate
may, from time to time, enact Statutes for the better
carrying into effect of this Act.

Repeal of Cap.57:01
24. The University of Botswana Act, hereinafter
referred to as the repealed Act, is hereby repealed.

AND

STATUTES

academic centre or an administrative department;
“Graduate” means a graduate of the University or a
graduate of the former universities, in accordance
with the Act;
“Quorum” means the minimum number of members
that must be present to constitute a valid meeting.
Except where otherwise specified by the Statutes,
the quorum of every committee shall be 50% (fifty
percent) of the membership thereof;
“Senate” means the Senate established under
Section 21 of the Act;

Transitional Provisions
26. (1) Upon commencement of this Act, there shall
be transferred to and vested in the University, by
virtue of this Act and without further assurance,
all property, rights, liabilities and obligations that,
immediately before the commencement of this Act,
were the property, rights, liabilities and obligations of
the former University.
(2) The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette,
make such transitional arrangements not otherwise
provided for in this Act as shall be necessary.
Passed by the National Assembly this 14th day of August,
2008.
E.S. MPOFU,
Clerk of the National Assembly.

“Staff Development Fellow” means an employee
of the University who is required to undertake
programmes of study or training in order to become
a member of the academic staff;
“Student” means any person currently registered for
the receipt of instruction in the University;
“Support Staff” means an employee of the
University whose terms and conditions of service
do not include the primary obligation to undertake
teaching and research;
“University” means the University of Botswana
established under Section 3 of the Act;

UNIVERSITY OF BOTSWANA STATUTES

“Vice Chancellor” means the Vice Chancellor
appointed pursuant to Section 8 (1) of the Act.

(2014 Edition)

University of Botswana Statutes
In Exercise of the powers conferred by Section 23 of the
University of Botswana Act (Cap.57:01), the Council of
the University of Botswana hereby makes the following
Statutes:

PART I PRELIMINARY
1.

These Statutes shall be cited as the University
of Botswana Statutes, 1982, which came into
operation on 7th October 1983; as revised from time
to time.

2.

In these Statutes, unless the context otherwise
requires:
“Academic staff ” means an employee of the
University whose terms and conditions of service
include the obligation to undertake teaching,
research and service and/or holders of posts declared
by Council on the advice of Senate to be academic;

3.

Nothing in these Statutes shall be interpreted in
such a manner as to conflict with the provisions
of the Act and where such conflict occurs the
provisions of the Act shall take precedence.

4.

The members of the University shall be:

(a)
The members of the Council;
(b)
The members of the Senate;
(c)
The employees of the University;
(d)
The professors emeritus;
(e)
The graduates;
(f)
The students;
(g) Such other persons as the Council may 		
declare to be members.
5.

The membership of students on Council, Senate, the
Committees of Council and Senate, and any other
Committees or Boards defined in these Statutes
shall cease if they cease to be registered students of
the University or when they are suspended, provided
that during such period of suspension the Student
Representative Council may nominate replacement
members from its membership.

6.

Unless otherwise specified in these Statutes, the
Secretary of every Committee or Board shall be
appointed by the Chairperson of the Committee or
Board.

7.

The Secretary to Council, Senate, and any other
Committee or Board defined in these Statutes shall
also be the Secretary to the respective Executive
Committee.

“Act” means the University of Botswana Act
(Cap.57:01);
“Chancellor” means the person holding the office of
Chancellor in accordance with Section 7 of the Act;
“Council” means the University Council established
under Section 9 of the Act;
“Department” means either an academic
department of the University established under
Statute 49 in which one or more programmes of
study are offered, or an administrative department;
“Deputy Vice Chancellor” means a Deputy Vice
Chancellor appointed under Part V hereof;
“Director” means the head of an institute, an

221

ACT

AND

STATUTES

PART II MEETINGS OF COUNCIL
8. (i) The Council shall hold an annual meeting in each
calendar year within six months after the end of
each academic year, as shall be appointed by the
Chairperson of Council.
(ii) At each annual meeting the Council will receive
an annual report of the activities of the University,
together with an audited Statement of Accounts,
and the Council shall take such action as may
be necessary and make such appointments as
required to be made at an annual meeting.
(iii) Notice of the annual meeting shall be circulated
by the Secretary of Council at least twenty-one
days before the date thereof and a copy of the
annual report and the audited Statement of
Accounts shall be sent to every member of the
Council at least fourteen days before the date of
the annual meeting.
(iv) An agenda shall be circulated by the Secretary to
Council at least fourteen days before any meeting
of the Council.

authority of the Senate; provided however, that
it is specifically recorded that any failure by the
University to affix the University Seal shall not
affect the enforceability of such lease, contract or
agreement in any manner whatsoever.
(iii) Except as provided in Statute 12 (ii), the University
Seal shall be used only on the specific authority
of the Council.
(iv) The affixing of the University Seal to any
certificates, diplomas, degrees or any awards shall
be attested to by the Secretary to Council and
witnessed by a Dean of Faculty or School.

9.

The University’s duly appointed Director of Legal
Services shall act as Secretary to Council and shall
be responsible for the management of the Council
Committee structure.

10

(i) When a vacancy occurs in the membership
of the Council the Secretary shall notify the
appointing or electing person or body, as
appropriate, requesting the appointment or
election of a successor to the vacant office, in
accordance with Section 9 of the Act and the
schedule thereto.
(ii) The Secretary shall arrange the conduct of all
elections to other bodies and offices by the
Council, its committees, and such other groups of
University staff as shall be determined from time
to time by the Vice Chancellor.
(iii)

Elections conducted under Statute 10 (ii) to
membership of Council shall 		
be conducted by secret ballot.

11. The Secretary shall be responsible for the signing
and custody of notices and legal documents on
behalf of the University and Council shall pass a
resolution to such effect for the purpose of legal
process.

16. The Auditor appointed in accordance with Statute
15 may require:
(i) Any member, servant or agent of the University
to produce such material information in regard
to any transaction of the University or the
management of its affairs as such member,
servant or agent is reasonably able to provide;
and

(v) The affixing of the University Seal to any
document, other than certificates, diplomas,
degrees or awards, as authorised by Council shall
be attested to by the Secretary to Council and by
a witness who shall be a member of the Council.

(ii) The production for inspection by the Auditor
of any book or document relating to the affairs
of or any cash or securities belonging to the
University by the member, servant or agent
of the University in possession of such book,
document, cash or securities.

PART IV APPOINTMENT OF THE VICE CHANCELLOR

17. The Auditor appointed in accordance with Statute
15 shall report directly to the Council on whether
proper books of account have been kept and
whether the financial statements of the University:

13.

(i) There shall be a Joint Committee of the
Council and the Senate to recommend to the
Council what advice it should give to the Minister,
in terms of Section 8(1) of the Act, on the
appointment of a Vice Chancellor.

(v) The Council shall exclude from its meetings the
student members when it is considering the
restricted agenda of Council.
(vi) Subject to these Statutes, Council shall regulate its
own procedure.

(b) No person shall be so appointed who, or any of
whose partners, is a member of the Council or
staff of the University.

(ii) The Joint Committee shall consist of the following
members:
(a) A chairperson, who is not the chairperson of
Council, appointed by Council from among those
of its members who are not employees of the
University;
(b) Three persons appointed by the Council from
among those of its members who are not members
of the Senate; and

(a) Were prepared on a basis consistent with the
requirements of the Council and/or in agreement
with the books of account;
(b) In the case of the income and expenditure
statement gives a true and fair view of the
income and expenditure of the University for
the financial year; and
(c) In the case of the balance sheet gives a true and
fair view of the University’s state of affairs as at
the end of the financial year.

PART VII EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF COUNCIL

(c) Three persons appointed by the Senate.

PART V APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY VICE
CHANCELLORS

18 (i) There shall be an Executive Committee of the
Council (in this part referred to as “the Executive
Committee”) which shall consist of the following
members:

14. (i) There shall be a Joint Committee of the Council and
the Senate which shall make recommendations
to the Council in respect of the appointment of
Deputy Vice Chancellors.

(a) The Chairperson of Council;
(b) The Vice -Chairperson of Council;
(c) The Vice -Chancellor; and
(d) Chairpersons of the Committees of Council.

(ii) The Joint Committee prescribed by the Statute
shall be constituted as in Statute 13 (ii) except
that the Vice Chancellor shall also be a member.

(ii) The Executive Management Team of the
University shall attend meetings of the Executive
Committee, but only the Vice Chancellor shall be
a member of the Executive Committee.

(iii)

The Council shall appoint Deputy Vice
Chancellors after considering recommendations
from the Joint Committee of Council and Senate,
and for such period and under such conditions as
the Council shall determine.

PART III THE UNIVERSITY SEAL

PART VI AUDITOR

12. (i) The Secretary to Council shall be responsible to
the Council for the safe custody of the University
Seal.

15. Unless otherwise directed under the provisions of
Section 13 of the Act, the Council shall appoint an
Auditor provided that:

(ii) The University Seal shall be affixed to leases,
contracts and agreements to which the University
is a party, and to parchments issued in respect of
any degree, diploma or certificate conferred by the

(a) The person so appointed shall be, in the opinion
of the Council, a qualified accountant actively
practising his/her profession; and

222

(iii) The quorum at any meeting of the Executive
Committee shall be four (4) members.
(iv) The Chairperson of the Council shall preside
at any meeting of the Executive Committee,
but in the absence of the Chairperson the Vice
- Chairperson shall preside, and in the absence
of both the Chairperson and Vice – Chairperson,
the members present shall elect one of them, not
being an employee of the University, to preside at
that meeting.
(v) The Executive Committee may invite any person
whose presence it considers necessary, to attend
and to participate in its deliberations, but such
person shall have no vote.

ACT
(vi) The Executive Committee may make other
rules and regulations to govern its proceedings
provided that the Chairperson of Council may
summon meetings whenever the Chairperson
may deem it necessary to do so.

controls and risks of fraud including from
the use of information and communication
technologies

AND

STATUTES

(d) Review the management letter from external
auditors and make recommendations to Council;

regulate and advise the Council on the finances,
accounts, annual estimates of expenditure,
investments, property business and generally, the
financial affairs of the University. Without prejudice
to the generality of the foregoing, the Committee
may:

(e) Receive and review the audited annual
statement of income and expenditure and make
recommendations to Council;

(a) Recommend policies regarding the management
and administration of the finances of the
University;

(f) Recommend to Council the form in which the
annual estimates of revenue and expenditure
and financial statements shall be prepared;

(b) Receive the annual estimates of revenue and
expenditure and act as an advisory committee
to Council on such estimates;

(g) Recommend to Council rules and procedures for
the control of expenditure and generally for the
administration of financial affairs;

(c) Recommend to Council the form in which the
annual estimates of revenue and expenditure
and financial statements shall be prepared;

(h) Oversee systems of internal controls and their
effectiveness within the University;

(d) Recommend to Council rules and procedures for
the control of expenditure and generally for the
administration of financial affairs; and

19. The Executive Committee may:
(a) Act on behalf of the Council between meetings
of the Council and deal with such matters as
may be referred to it by the Council;
(b) At the request of the Chairperson of the Council,
act as an advisory body to the Chairperson of
Council.
(c) Deal with such other matters as may from time
to time be referred to it by the Council.

PART VIII AUDIT COMMITTEE
20. (i) There shall be an Audit Committee of the Council
(in this Part referred to as “the Committee”),
which shall consist of the following members:

(i) Monitor and review the University’s accounting
policies and risk assessment procedures and
make recommendations for amendment to
Council;

(a) A Chairperson appointed annually by
Council from among those of its members
who are not employees of the University;

(j) Make such recommendations as the Committee
may deem appropriate to Council.

24. (i)

(b) Two members appointed annually by
Council from among those of its members
who are not employees of the University;

PART IX

(c) Two members appointed annually who are
suitably qualified and experienced auditors;

22. (i) There shall be a Finance Committee of the
Council (in this Part referred to as “the
Committee”) which shall consist of the following
members:

(d)

Additional members appointed by Council
for their expertise.

(ii) Subject to any directions, which may be given
by the Council, the Committee shall regulate its
own procedure and may invite members of the
Executive Management Team or any employee(s)
of the University to its meetings.
21. Subject to such limitations as the Council may
impose, the Committee shall meet at least twice
a year and monitor financial and administrative
controls, risk, fraud, reporting and advise the
Council on internal and external audits of
finances, accounts, investments, property, business,
administrative procedures and generally, the
financial and administrative affairs of the University;
and recommend external auditors for appointment
by the Council, Without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing, the Committee may:

FINANCE COMMITTEE
(ii)

The Committee shall recommend to Council the
establishment of a fund (in this Statute referred
to as “the Fund”).
There shall be paid into the Fund:
(a) Monies representing any gift, donation,
legacy or endowment received by the
University without direction as to the
purpose to which the same shall be applied;

(a) A Chairperson appointed annually by
Council from among those of its members
who are not employees of the University;

(b) Monies appropriated in terms of Statute 24
(iii); and/or

(b) One member of Council appointed annually
from among those of its members who are
not employees of the University;

(c) Monies accruing or realised from any
investment or deposit made under Statutes
24 (iv) or (v).

(c) Vice Chancellor;
(iii)

The annual estimates of the University shall
make provision for the expenditure of any
monies to be appropriated by the Committee
for payment into the Fund, and shall specify
the purposes for which those monies may be
paid from the Fund.

(iv)

Pending payment from the Fund, monies of
the Fund (including monies appropriated
for payment into the Fund) shall, as far as is
practicable, be invested.

(v)

Monies of the Fund which are not invested
in accordance with Statute 24 (iv) shall be
deposited in a University bank account
specifically opened for that purpose.

Additional members appointed by Council
for their expertise.

(vi)

(ii) Subject to any directions, which may be
given by the Council, the Committee shall
regulate its own procedure.

Subject to the supervision of the Committee,
investments of the monies of the Fund may
be released at any time.

(vii)

Monies may be paid from the Fund either for
the purposes specified under Statute 24 (iii)
or for such other purposes as the Committee
may determine.

(d) Deputy Vice Chancellors;
(e) Permanent Secretary of the Ministry
of Education & Skills Development or
representative;
(f) Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
Finance and Development Planning or
representative;

(a) Recommend policies regarding the management
and administration of the audit of the University
to Council and ensure the carrying out and
effectiveness of the annual statutory audit of
the University accounts and assets;

(g) Director of Financial Services;

(b) Recommend external auditors for appointment
by Council, verify the independence of the
auditor; recommend the audit fee and the scope
of the appointment of auditors, the nature and
extent of non-audit services and the approval of
contracts for non-audit services;

(i)

(c) Oversee internal audit processes, approve the
internal audit plan, review internal financial

(e) Recommend to Council the persons who shall
be authorised to sign cheques, contracts and
other financial orders and documents on behalf
of the University, provided such persons shall
include the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Finance and
Administration).

(h) One student appointed annually by the
Students Representative Council of the
University;

23. Subject to such limitations as the Council may
impose, the Committee may govern,manage,

223

ACT

AND

STATUTES

25. (i) The Committee shall cause to be kept all
proper books and records of account of the
income, expenditure, assets and liabilities of the
University.
(ii) Within three months of the end of each financial
year, the Committee shall cause to be submitted
to the Auditor the account of the University
together with:
(a) a statement of income and expenditure
during such year; and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of
the University on the last day of such year.
26. The financial year of the University shall be the
period from 1st April in one year to 31st March in
the following year.
27. (i)

Subject to the approval of the Council, the
Committee shall by regulation prescribe the
level of fees payable, and the dates by which
such fees shall be paid, in respect of tuition,
maintenance and such other facilities and
services of the University as the Council may
from time to time determine.

(ii) The Committee shall by regulation declare that
no student shall be awarded a degree or other
qualification of the University unless he/she shall
have paid, or have had paid on his/her behalf, all
fees including fines due to the University.
28. The Committee may exercise or perform any
duty conferred or imposed on it with financial
implications, subject to such limitations as the
Council may specify.

PART X HUMAN RESOURCES COMMITTEE
29. (i)

There shall be a Human Resources Committee
of the Council (in this Part referred to as “the
Committee”) which shall consist of the following
members:
(a) Vice Chancellor;
(b) Deputy Vice Chancellors;
(c) Director of Human Resources;
(d) A person appointed by Senate;
(e) One Dean of Faculty elected by the Deans;
(f ) One external member of Council appointed
by Council;
(g) One member of the academic staff elected by
the academic staff;
(h) One member of the support staff elected by
the support staff;
(i) At the discretion of the chairperson, not
more than two additional members with
special competence from within or outside
the University.

(ii) The Council shall appoint, on an annual basis, a
chairperson from amongst the members of the

Committee.

(d) Two external members of Council appointed
by Council;

30. The Committee shall inter alia recommend to
Council, for approval, policies regarding the human
resource development and training needs, the
terms and conditions of service, and benefits of the
employees of the University.

PART XI PHYSICAL RESOURCES COMMITTEE
31. (i)

There shall be a Physical Resources Committee
(in this Part referred to as “the Committee”)
which shall consist of the following members:
(a) Vice Chancellor;
(b) Deputy Vice Chancellor;
(c) Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
Education or representative;
(d) Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
Finance and Development Planning or
representative;
(e) One member of Senate appointed by Senate;
(f ) Director of Institutional Planning;
(g) Director of Campus Services;
(h) Director of Financial Services;
(i) Director of the Department of Architecture
and Building Services in the Ministry of
Works, Transport, and Communications or
representative;
(j) A representative of a local authority as a coopted member;
(k) The member of Council appointed to Council
from Senate;
(l) One external member of Council appointed
by Council.

(ii) The Council shall appoint, on an annual basis, a
chairperson from amongst the members of the
Committee.
32. (i) The Committee shall, inter alia recommend to
the Council policies on the physical development
of the University and the overall management
of construction, maintenance and security
of buildings, grounds, campus properties,
equipment and vehicles of the University.

PART XII STAFF APPOINTMENTS AND
PROMOTIONS COMMITTEE
33. (i) There shall be a Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee of the Council (in this
Part referred to as “the Committee”) which shall
consist of the following members:
(a) Vice Chancellor;
(b) Deputy Vice Chancellors;
(c) Principal of the Botswana College of
Agriculture;

224

(e) One Dean of Faculty elected by the Deans;
(f ) Director of Human Resources;
(g) Three professors from within the University,
coming from different faculties, elected by
Senate for a term of three years after which
they shall be eligible for re-election for a
second term only.
(ii) The Council shall appoint, on an annual basis, a
chairperson from amongst the members of the
Committee.
(iii) Deans of Faculties and Schools, Directors
of Institutes and Centres, and Directors of
Administrative Departments to or within which
an appointment or promotion is to be made may
be invited but only when the business of their
Faculty, School, Institute, Centre, or Department
is under consideration.
(iv) Subject to any directions which may be given by
the Council, the Committee shall regulate its own
procedure.
34.(i) Subject to such directions as may be given by
the Council, the Committee shall make every
appointment and every promotion of the
academic staff of the University of the rank of
associate professor and above, the appointment
of Deans and Deputy Deans of Faculties, Directors
of Institutes and Centres, and the appointment
of support staff of the University of the rank of
Director or equivalent.
(ii) No appointment or promotion of such members
of the academic and the support staff of the
University as are specified in Statute 34 (i)
shall be made by the Committee unless it has
considered every recommendation made to it
by an Appointments, Promotions and Review
Committee in accordance with Part XXXV.
35. (i) Subject to such directions as may be given by the
Council, every appointment and every promotion
of the academic staff of the University below
the rank of associate professor, and of the
support staff of the University below the rank of
director, shall be made by the Vice Chancellor or
such persons as to whom such powers may be
delegated by the Vice Chancellor.
(ii) No appointment or promotion of such members
of the academic and the support staff of the
University as are specified in Statute 35 (i) shall
be made by the Vice Chancellor or such persons
as to whom such powers may be delegated
until the Vice Chancellor has considered every
recommendation made by the Appointments,
Promotions and Review Committee in accordance
with Part XXXV.
36. The Vice Chancellor may refer decisions in respect
of University staff appointments or promotions to
Council and defer their implementation until Council
has taken a decision on them.

ACT
PART XIII STAFF APPEALS COMMITTEE
37. (i) There shall be a Staff Appeals Committee
of Council (in this Part referred to as “the
Committee”) which shall consist of the following
members
a) two external members of Council appointed
by Council;
b) one member of Senate appointed by Senate;
c) additional members appointed by Council
acting on the recommendation of the
Committee.
(ii) Council shall appoint, on an annual basis, a
Chairperson from amongst the members of the
Committee.
(iii) Subject to any directions which may be given by
Council, the Committee shall regulate its own
procedures.
38. Subject to such directions as may be given by the
Council, the Committee shall hear appeals by
staff against decisions of Management and make
appropriate recommendations to Council.

PART XIV VICE CHANCELLOR
39. Subject to the Act, the Vice Chancellor shall be
the Chief Executive Officer of the University and
shall have overall responsibility for academic
and administrative leadership by directing policy
formulation and institutional planning and
development; for the management and development
of the University by ensuring implementation of
University policy; and for the achievement of its
mission through monitoring and evaluation of the
performance of the University in realizing its goals
and objectives.
40. The Vice Chancellor shall be responsible to the Council
for maintaining and promoting the reputation and
good order, efficient and effective processes and
procedures of the University, and shall have all
such powers as are necessary or expedient for the
performance of these duties, and may establish
such committees as the Vice Chancellor may deem
necessary for the better carrying into effect of these
functions.
41. The Vice Chancellor shall have overall direction and
responsibility over the academic and administrative
work of the University and the staff thereof, and the
officers and servants employed in, or in connection
with, such work, including (but without limitation
by reason of such particularity) the Deputy Vice
Chancellors, and has such other powers and shall
perform such other duties as may be conferred upon
or assigned to the Vice Chancellor by the Council;
it being specifically recorded that any derogation of
responsibility to such officers, servants and Deputy
Vice Chancellors made in accordance with these
Statutes shall be strictly without derogation to the
authority of the Vice Chancellor as provided for by
Section 8 (2) of the Act.
42. (i) Subject to such regulation as the Council
may approve, the Vice-Chancellor may, in the
performance of his/her duties under Statute 39,
by order:

(a) Prohibit the admission as a student of any
person to the University;
(b) Prohibit, for such period as shall be specified,
any student from attending classes or a
particular class;
(c) Prohibit any student from entering or
remaining on such part or parts of the
University precinct as shall be specified;
(d) Dismiss or suspend for such period as shall be
specified any student or group of students;

AND

STATUTES

(e) Three students one of whom should be a
graduate student appointed annually by the
Students Representative Council;
(f ) Director of Academic Development;
(g) Two representatives of each Faculty, elected
by the Faculty Board one of whom shall be a
Professor or an Associate Professor;
(h) Director of Library Services;
(i) Director of Research and Development;
(j) Deputy Director of Affiliated Institutions;

(e) Take any other action against any student as
the Vice Chancellor may in the circumstances
deem appropriate.

(k) Director of Academic Services;
(l) Director of Continuing Education.

(ii) The Vice Chancellor may appoint a disciplinary
committee, with such membership as is deemed
appropriate, to assist the Vice Chancellor in the
performance of the Vice Chancellor’s duties
under this Statute.
43. Subject to the Act and to Statute 41, the Vice
Chancellor may delegate such powers, duties or
functions as is deemed fit and prescribe conditions
governing the exercise of any delegated power, duty
or function, provided that, in the absence of express
provision made by him/her power delegated shall not
include power to sub delegate.
44. The Vice Chancellor shall by virtue of office be a
member of every Faculty and of every other entity of
the University established by or under the Statutes
and of every board or committee appointed by the
Council, by the Senate, by any Faculty or by any other
authority of the University established by or under
these Statutes.

PART XV DEPUTY VICE CHANCELLORS

(ii) The Vice Chancellor shall be Chairperson of the
Senate and in the Vice Chancellor’s absence the
Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) shall
act as Chairperson of Senate.
(iii) Where Senate is considering any matter where
conflict of interest might arise when discussed in
the presence of any member, such a member shall
be required by the Senate to recuse themselves
from any further consideration of the matter.
(iv) The Senate shall exclude from its meetings
the student members when it is considering
the academic performance in examinations or
otherwise, of individual students, or matters
relating to a member or members of staff
which the Senate in its discretion shall consider
confidential.
(v) Senate shall regulate its own procedures by the
standing orders formulated by itself.
(vi) The Senate may:

45. (i) The Deputy Vice Chancellors shall be responsible
to the Vice Chancellor For providing leadership
through policy formulation and planning,
management and administration in their
respective areas of responsibilities as may be
defined in the Ordinances/Regulations provided
for by Part XXXIX, if any.

(a) Appoint any committee consisting of
members of the Senate and such other
persons as it deems appropriate;

(ii) By virtue of office, a Deputy Vice Chancellor
shall be a member of such other committees of
Council and Senate as may from time to time be
prescribed in these Statutes.

(c) Delegate any of its powers and functions to
any committee appointed under this Statute.

PART XVI SENATE
46. (i) The membership of the Senate shall consist of:
(a) Vice Chancellor;
(b) Deputy Vice Chancellors;
(c) Three representatives from each faculty
elected by the Faculty Board , two of whom
shall be professors or Associate professors
and the other a senior lecturer or lecturer.;
(d) Deans of the Faculties, Schools of the
University and the Deans of the Botswana
College of Agriculture;

225

(b) Authorise any committee appointed under
this Statute to act jointly with any committee
appointed by the Council; and

47. Senate shall be the academic authority of the
University and shall have overall responsibility
for the academic policies, plans, and programmes
of the University and shall have general control
and direction under the Council of the teaching,
research, examinations, conferment of degrees and
the granting of other awards of the University. In
addition, Senate shall be responsible for articulating
the mission statement, goals and objectives of the
University for approval by Council.
48. Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Senate shall
have power to:
(a) Make regulations relating to teaching and
instruction within the University including
programmes of study and contents of courses,
provided that the introduction of new
programmes of study shall be subject to the

ACT

AND

STATUTES

approval of the Council;
(b) Make regulations governing the admission of
persons to programmes of study in the University;
(c)

Make regulations governing methods of
assessing and examining the academic
performance of students, and regulations for the
conduct of examinations;

(d) Make regulations governing the award of such
fellowships, scholarships, studentship, exhibitions
and other prizes as the Council may establish,
subject to any conditions made by the founders
or donors thereof and accepted by the Council;
(e) Authorise the conferment of degrees, diplomas,
certificates and other awards and shall be
determined their titles and abbreviations;
(f ) By regulation, define academic dress and
prescribe the use thereof;
(g) Recommend to Council the conferment of
the title and status of Emeritus Professor on
any Professor at or after his/her retirement in
recognition of long and distinguished service
to the University or to the former University of
Botswana and Swaziland and their antecedents;
(h) Initiate proposals relating to the conduct of the
University generally, discuss matters relating to
the University and make representations thereon
to the Council; exercise all such other powers as
are or may be conferred upon the Senate by the
Act, by the Statutes, or by the Council, and make
such regulations or rules as are necessary in the
exercise of those powers.

(g) The Director of Research and Development.
(ii) The Committee may make rules and regulations
to govern its proceedings provided that the Vice
Chancellor may summon meetings whenever the
Vice Chancellor may deem it necessary to do so.
(iii) The Vice Chancellor shall be Chairperson of the
Executive Committee and in the Vice Chancellor’s
absence the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic
Affairs) shall act as Chairperson.
52. The Executive Committee may:

(b) At the request of the Vice Chancellor, act as an
advisory body to the Vice Chancellor;

(b) Three persons appointed by the Council;
from among those of its members who are
not members of the Senate; and

(c) Deal with such other matters as may from time to
time be referred to it by Senate.

(c) Three professors appointed by the Senate.

PART XVIII CONGREGATION
53. (i) There shall be a Congregation of the University
for the purpose of Conferring degrees and
honorary degrees and for granting diplomas,
certificates and other awards of the University.
(ii) All members of the University, as defined in
Statute 2, shall be members of the congregation
and it shall be open to the Senate to invite other
persons to a Congregation.
(iii) A Congregation shall be presided over by the
Chancellor or in the Chancellor’s absence by the
Vice Chancellor.

50. The Senate shall meet at least twice each semester.

54. (i) Any degree may be awarded honoris causa.

(a) Vice Chancellor;
(b) Deputy Vice Chancellors;

(iv) A Congregation shall be held at least once in
each academic year and shall be called by the
authority of the Senate.

(ii) Honorary degrees may from time to time be
conferred upon any person who is not an
employee of the University and who has rendered
distinguished service in the advancement of
any branch of learning or who has otherwise
rendered himself/herself worthy of such degree.
(iii)

At the invitation of the Vice Chancellor,
members of the University may submit written
nominations for the conferment of honorary
degrees upon deserving persons.

(c) The Deans of the Faculties and Schools of the
University and the Deans of the Faculties of
the Botswana College of Agriculture;

(iv) Each such nomination shall be accompanied by a
statement of the degree recommended and the
grounds for making the recommendation.

(d) Two persons who are members of the Senate,
elected by the Senate, one of whom shall be a
Professor or an Associate Professor;

(v) The Vice Chancellor shall be the sole authority to
ask persons upon whom it is proposed to confer
honorary degrees whether or not they wish to
accept such award.

(e) Director of Academic Services;
(f ) Director of Continuing Education; and

55.(i) There shall be an Academic Honours Committee
of Senate (in this part referred to as “the
Committee”) which shall consist of the following
members:
(a) Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs)
who shall be chairperson;

PART XIX HONORARY DEGREES

51. (i) There shall be an Executive Committee of
the Senate (in this part referred to as “the
Committee”) which shall consist of the following
members:

PART XX ACADEMIC HONOURS COMMITTEE

(a) Act on behalf of the Senate between Senate
meetings and deal with such matters as may be
referred to it by Senate;

49. The Senate shall recommend to the Council the
establishment of academic Departments and
determine which Departments and academic
subjects shall form part of or be the responsibility
of each Faculty or school and may determine that a
Department or academic subject shall form part of
or be the responsibility of more than one Faculty or
School.

PART XVII EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF SENATE

or a resolution of the Senate and the Council
passed by not less than two thirds of the
members of the Senate and the Council present,
on the recommendation of an Academic Honours
Committee.

(vi) Notwithstanding Statute 54 (i), an honorary
degree shall be conferred only on the authority

226

(ii) The Committee shall recommend to Senate the
conferment of honorary degrees.
(iii) Subject to any directions which may be given by
the Council and the Senate, the Committee shall
regulate its own procedure.

PART XXI PLANNING AND RESOURCES
COMMITTEE
56. There shall be a Planning and Resources Committee
of Senate (in this part referred to as “the Committee”)
which shall consist of the following members:
(a) Deputy Vice Chancellor (Finance and
Administration) who shall be the chairperson;
(b) Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs);
(c) Deputy Vice Chancellor (Student Affairs);
(d) The Deans of the Faculties and Schools;
(e) Two members of the academic staff appointed by
Senate;
(f ) Director of Academic Services;
(g) Director of Financial Services;
(h) Director of Campus Services;
(i) Director of Human Resources;
(j) The Directors of Institutes and Centres;
(k) Director of Library Services; and
(l) Director of Institutional Planning.
57. The Committee shall inter alia:
(a) Review the mission statement, goals, and
objectives of the University and recommend to
Senate accordingly;
(b) Co-ordinate the University’s planning and
development strategy;

ACT
(c) Co-ordinate the methodology of allocation and
distribution of internal resources in support of
the institutional planning and development
strategy;
(d) Review sectional planning submissions in order
to ensure their appropriateness and consistency
with the mission, strategy and objectives of the
University, and advise Senate accordingly;

plan, setting out the resource implications of
implementation, and advise Senate accordingly;

(i)

(v) Review continually the needs which underpin
the elements of the University’s academic plan
and, where necessary and appropriate, suggest
changes and improvements to Senate.

STATUTES

Direct and regulate, within the general academic
policy formulated by the Senate, all matters
relating to teaching, instruction and research
within each Faculty or School, including curricula
and examinations, and advise the Senate on such
matters;

(ii) Appoint internal and external examiners and
recommend to the Finance Committee the fees
payable to the examiners;

(e) Evaluate sectional planning submissions and
recommend funding priorities to Senate; and

PART XXIII BOARDS OF FACULTIES, SCHOOLS,
INSTITUTES AND CENTRES

(f) Advise Senate on the integration of academic,
financial and physical plans into the University’s
institutional plan.

60. Each Faculty, School, Institute or Centre shall have a
Board which shall meet at least twice each semester
but otherwise shall regulate its own procedure by the
standing orders formulated by it.

PART XXII ACADEMIC POLICY REVIEW AND
PLANNING COMMITTEE

AND

61. (i) There shall be a Faculty Board of each Faculty
which shall consist of the following members:

58. There shall be an Academic Policy Review and
Planning Committee of Senate (in this part referred
to as the “Committee”) which shall consist of the
following members:

(a) The Dean of the Faculty, who shall be
Chairperson;
(b) The Deputy Dean of the Faculty;

(iii) Make recommendations to the Senate in respect
of the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates
and other awards, academic titles and distinctions
within the Faculty;
(iv) Discuss any matters relating to the work of the
Faculty and submit recommendations thereon to
the Senate;
(v) From time to time, consider the progress and
conduct of the students of the Faculty and make
regular reports to the Senate;
(vi) Consider all matters referred to it for its
consideration by the Senate and report to the
Senate;

(a) Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) who
shall be the chairperson;

(c) Heads of Departments;

(b) Principal of the Botswana College of Agriculture
or representative;

(d) Such members of the academic staff of the
Departments of the Faculty as the Board
may determine;

(vii) Receive at each meeting oral and/or written
reports from Heads of Departments and Faculty
representatives on University committees and
boards;

(c) Deans of the Faculties and Schools of the
University and the Deans of the Faculties of the
Botswana College of Agriculture;

(e) One representative of each of the Faculties
including the Faculties of Botswana College
of Agriculture;

(viii)

(d) Director of Library Services;

(f ) Director of Library Services or representative;

(e) Director of Academic Services;

(g) One representative of each of the Institutes
and Centres of the University;

(f) Director of Academic Development;

(h) Such number of students as the Board may
determine;

(g) Two persons appointed by Senate, one of whom
should be a Professor or an Associate Professor;

(i)

(h) Director of Institutional Planning;
(i) Director of Research and Development;
(j) Director of Continuing Education.
59. The Committee shall:
(i)

Review the University’s academic policies and
advise Senate accordingly;

(ii) Review proposals from the Faculties, Schools,
Institutes and Centres and from the academic
support service units for changes in academic
policy, ensure their compliance with the
academic policies of the University, and advise
Senate accordingly;
(iii) Review and advise Senate on the submissions
from the Faculties, Schools, Institutes and Centres
and from the academic support service units in
which are outlined in the academic plans for
the accomplishment of the University’s mission,
objectives, and strategies with a statement of
the attendant human, financial, and physical
resource requirements;
(iv) Integrate and consolidate the academic planning
submissions into the University’s academic

(j)

Such number of staff development fellows
of the Departments of the Faculty as the
Board may determine;

Such other persons as the Senate may determine.

(ii) The members of a Faculty Board referred to in
Statute 61 (i), (e), (g) and (h) shall vacate their
seats at the end of each academic year but shall
be eligible for reappointment.

Appoint committees consisting of members
of the Faculty and such other persons as it
thinks fit and delegate any of its functions to the
committees so appointed.

63.(i) There shall be a School of Graduate Studies, the
Board of which (“the School Board”) shall consist
of the following members:
(a) Dean of the School, who shall be
Chairperson;
(b) One person appointed by Senate;
(c) One representative from each Faculty,
School, Institute or Centre who shall be
of the rank of at least senior lecturer or
equivalent;
(d) One representative of each of the
Departments
offering
postgraduate
programmes;

(iii) The quorum of a Faculty Board shall be one third
of the membership thereof.

(e) Director of Library Services or representative;

(iv) Part-time members of academic staff may attend
meetings of the Faculty Board at the discretion of
the Dean but shall have no vote.

(f) Two post graduate students elected for a
period of one academic year by and from
among the postgraduate students; and

(v) A Faculty Board shall exclude from its meeting
the student members when it is considering the
academic performance of individual students, or
when it is discussing any other matter relating to
a member or members of staff which a Faculty
Board in its discretion shall consider confidential.

(g) Such other persons as the Senate may
determine.

62. Subject to the Statutes and to such limitations as
the Senate may impose, a Faculty Board or School
may:

227

(ii) The members of the School Board referred to in
Statute 63 (i) (b) and (c) shall vacate their seats
at the end of each academic year but shall be
eligible for reappointment.
(iii) The quorum of the School Board shall be one
third of the membership thereof.

ACT

AND

STATUTES

(iv) The School Board shall exclude from its meeting
the student members when it is considering
the academic performance in examination or
otherwise, of individual students, or when it is
discussing any matters relating to a member or
members of staff which the Board in its discretion
shall consider confidential.

(c) Notwithstanding the generality of Statute
65 (i), advise the Director of the Institute
or Centre on the priorities and emphasis of
scholarship required for the benefit of the
nation or of particular sectors of the nation;

64. Subject to the Statutes to such limitations as the
Senate may impose, the School Board shall:

(d) Approve the affiliation or attachment to an
Institute or Centre of individual academics;

(i)

Promote the development of quality and
relevance in the provision of graduate studies;

(ii) Approve admissions and progression for all
graduate students;
(iii) Provide leadership in the co-ordination and
development of graduate studies;
(iv) Maintain quality across all graduate programmes;

Centre;

Committee”) shall consist of the following members:

(f) Consider all matters referred to it by Senate
and report thereon to the Senate.

69. The Executive Committee of the Board of an Institute
or Centre (in this part referred to as “the Committee”)
shall consist of the following members:

(iv) The quorum of the Board of an Institute or Centre
shall be one third of the membership thereof.

(a) The Director of the Institute or Centre, who shall
be the Chairperson;

(vi) Establish guidelines for supervision of graduate
students (approval of supervisors and monitor
the progress of graduate students);

66. (i) There shall be an Executive Committee of the
Board of each Faculty, School, Institute or Centre.

Work to enhance the facilities available to
graduate students.

65. (i) There shall be a Board of each Institute or Centre
which shall consist of the following members:
(a) The Director of the Institute or Centre who
shall be the chairperson;
(b) Such members of the academic staff as the
Board may from time to time determine;
(c) One member from each Faculty elected by
the Faculty Board;
(d) One member of Senate elected by Senate;
(e) Such other persons as the Senate may
determine; and
(f ) Such number of staff development fellows
of the Institute or Centre as the Board may
determine.
(ii) The members of the Board referred to in Statute
65 (i) (c) and (d) shall vacate their seats at the
end of each academic year but shall be eligible
for reappointment.
(iii) Subject to the direction of Senate, the Board of
an Institute or Centre may:
(a) Decide on matters of general policy
regarding the work of the Institute or
Centre, after consultation with the staff of
the Institute or Centre;
(b) Establish advisory groups to give the Board
and the Director advice on any academic
work, research project, or consultancy being,
or to be, undertaken by the Institute or

(d) One person who is a member of the School Board,
elected by the School Board.

PART XXVII EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OF
INSTITUTES OR CENTRES

PART XXIV EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OF BOARDS,
SCHOOLS, INSTITUTES OR CENTRES

(viii)

(b) The Faculty representatives on the Board;(c)
One person appointed by the Senate;

(e) Generally direct and approve proposals
for activities of the Institute or Centre in
pursuance of its objectives;

(v) Assist with fund-raising and marketing of
graduate programmes;

(vii) Maintain clear lines of communication with
each faculty and department offering graduate
studies;

(a) The Dean of the School, who shall be Chairperson;

(b) The Deputy Director of the Institute or Centre;
(c) The Heads of Departments or Units of the
Institute or Centre; and
(d) One person who is a member of the Board of the
Institute, elected by the Board of the Institute.

(ii) The Executive Committee shall:
(a) Act on behalf of the Board between Board
meetings and deal with such matters as may
be referred to it by the Board;
(b) Act at the request of the Dean of a Faculty
or School, or the Director of an Institute or
Centre as an advisory body to the Dean or
Director.
(iii) The Committee may make rules and regulations
to govern its proceedings, provided that the
Dean or the Director may summon meetings
whenever the Dean or Director may deem it
necessary to do so.

PART XXV EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OF FACULTY
BOARDS
67. (i) The Executive Committee of each Faculty Board
(in this part referred to as “the Committee”) shall
consist of the following members:
(a) The Dean of the Faculty;
(b) The Deputy Dean of the Faculty;
(c) The Heads of Department of the Faculty;
(d) Two persons elected by the Faculty Board
one of whom shall be a professor or an
associate professor.
(ii) The Dean of the Faculty shall be the
Chairperson of the Executive Committee and
in his/her absence the Deputy Dean shall act as
Chairperson.

PART XXVI EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES
68. The Executive Committee of the Board of the School
of Graduate Studies (in this part referred to as “the

228

PART XXVIII DEANS OF FACULTIES AND SCHOOLS,
AND DIRECTORS OF INSTITUTES AND CENTRES
70

(i) The Dean or Director shall be the chief
executive officer of the Faculty, Institute or Centre
shall, subject to the Act and to these Statutes,
be responsible for its general administration, the
supervision of the academic and the support
staff, the teaching and study of the subjects
assigned to the Faculty, School, Institute, or
Centre, the welfare and academic progress of
the students, and shall have such other powers
and duties as may be assigned to him/her by the
Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) on
behalf of, and as directed by, the Vice Chancellor.
(ii) The Dean or Director shall participate in the
formulation, implementation and evaluation
of the academic policies of the University
and shall promote academic excellence in the
teaching, research and service programmes of
the University. He/she shall provide academic
leadership to the Faculty, School, Institute,
or Centre by planning, directing, and coordinating the formulation and implementation
of the academic plans and programmes of the
departments of the Faculty, School, Institute, or
Centre.
(iii) The Dean or Director, subject to the approval
of the Vice Chancellor may delegate any powers
or duties under this Statute subject to such
restrictions and conditions as may be imposed,
provided that a power delegated shall not
include power to sub delegate.

(iv) By virtue of office, the Dean or Director shall be a
member of all the boards and committees in the
Faculty, School, Institute or Centre. In addition,
he/she shall be a member of such committees
of the Council and Senate as may from time to
time be prescribed in these Statutes.
71. Where the Dean of a Faculty is unable, whether by
reason of his/her absence from the University, or for

ACT
any other reason, to carry out his/her functions as
such, the Deputy Dean of the Faculty shall act as
Dean of the Faculty. If the Deputy Dean is unable to
act as Dean, the Deputy Vice Chancellor may, after
consulting the Dean, if that is reasonably practicable,
and the members of the Executive Committee of the
Faculty Board appoint a person of or above the rank
of senior lecturer from among those members of the
Faculty Board referred to in Statute 61 (i) (c) to act as
Dean of the Faculty.
72. Where the Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
is unable, whether by reason of absence from the
University, or for any other reason, to carry out
functions as such, the Deputy Vice Chancellor
(Academic Affairs) shall, after consulting the Dean,
if that is reasonably practicable, and the members of
the Executive Committee of the Board of the School
of Graduate Studies, appoint a person of the rank of
at least an associate professor from among members
of the Faculty Boards to act as Dean of the School.
73. Where the Director of an Institute or a Centre is
unable, whether by reason of absence from the
University, or for any other reason, to carry out
functions as such, the Deputy Vice Chancellor
(Academic Affairs) shall appoint from among the
academic staff of the Institute or Centre a person of
or above the rank of senior lecturer to act as Director
of the Institute or Centre.

PART XXIX DEPUTY DEANS OF FACULTIES
74. (i) The Deputy Dean of a Faculty shall assist the Dean
in the formulation, planning and implementation
of academic policy of the Faculty and shall have
responsibility for ensuring the academic welfare
of the students registered in the Faculty.
(ii) By virtue of office, the Deputy Dean shall be
a member of all the boards and committees
in their Faculty. In addition, the Deputy Dean
shall be a member of such committees of the
Council and Senate as may from time to time be
prescribed in these Statutes.

PART XXX APPOINTMENTS OF DEANS, DEPUTY
DEANS AND DIRECTORS OF INSTITUTES OR
CENTRES
75. (i) Each Faculty shall have a Dean and a Deputy
Dean and each Institute or Centre shall have a
Director who shall be appointed by the Academic
and Administrative Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee taking into consideration
the recommendation of the appropriate
Appointments,
Promotions
and
Review
Committee.
(ii) Where there is a vacancy in any of the offices
referred to under Statute 75 (i), the Deputy Vice
Chancellor (Academic Affairs) shall cause the
position to be advertised within the Faculty,
Institute, or Centre.
(iii) Candidates for the position of Dean, Deputy
Dean, or Director shall make their candidacy
known either through an application or through
a nomination or by invitation of the University
of Botswana.
(iv) In the event of the establishment of a new

Faculty, or where a vacancy of Dean of Faculty
has been advertised in accordance with
Statute 75 (ii) and it has been determined that
there are no suitable internal candidates, the
University shall, after consultation with the
Faculty Appointments, Promotions and Review
Committee, extend the search for a Dean
internationally. In this event, the requirements
shall be for a person holding the rank of
associate professor or above.
(v) A Dean appointed in accordance with Statute 75
(iv) above shall, upon successful completion of
two three-year terms, have the option to apply
to take up appointment at the appropriate rank
in the relevant Department by filling a vacant
position. Alternatively, the University may offer
appointment on supernumerary basis for a
period not exceeding three years.

AND

STATUTES

Dean or Deputy Director, the assessment shall
be done by the Dean or Director, as the case
may be. (xiii) On completion of two consecutive
terms of office, a Dean, Deputy Dean or Director
shall not be eligible for further apointment to
the position of Dean, Deputy Dean or Director
until a three year period has elapsed.

PART XXXI APPOINTMENT OF THE DEAN OF THE
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES
76.

(i) The Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
shall be appointed by the Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee taking into consideration
the recommendation of a Special Selection
Committee which shall consist of the following
members:

(vi) The file of candidates shall be reviewed by the
appropriate Appointments, Promotions and
Review Committee which shall recommend
a short list of candidates to the Staff
Appointments and Promotions Committee of
persons for appointment as Deans and Deputy
Deans of the Faculties and Directors of Institutes
and Centres.

(a) Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs)
who shall be chairperson;

(vii) No person shall be eligible for appointment
as Dean, Deputy Dean, or Director unless he/
she has been, for the twelve months preceding
appointment, of or above the rank of senior
lecturer or equivalent.

(d) Director of
representative.

(b) The Deans of the Faculties and the Schools of
the University and the Deans of the Faculties
of the Botswana College of Agriculture;
(c) Two Professors appointed by the Senate;

(ii)

(vi) The Dean, Deputy Dean or Director shall be
subject to an annual performance appraisal
and review undertaken by the Deputy Vice
Chancellor (Academic Affairs) who shall provide
a report to the appropriate Appointments,
Promotions and Review Committee which shall
recommend to the Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee.
(ix) Subject to these Statutes, the Dean, Deputy
Dean, or Director shall hold the appointment as
such for three years, and shall be eligible for reappointment for a further term of three years
provided that he/she shall not hold office for a
continuous period exceeding six years.
(x) Before the completion of the initial three year
term, the Dean, Deputy Dean, or Director shall
inform the Deputy Vice Chancellor of his/her
intentions regarding renewal of the term of
office; which intention shall be recorded in
writing at least 60 days prior to the completion
of the said initial three year term.

Human

Resources

or

Where there is a vacancy in the office of the
Dean of the School of Graduate Studies, the
Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) shall
cause the position to be advertised within the
University inviting applications from suitably
qualified members of the University staff. No
person shall be eligible for appointment as
Dean unless he/she has been, for the twelve
(12) months immediately preceding the
appointment, of or above the rank of associate
professor.

(iii) Candidates for the position of Dean shall make
their candidacy known either through an
application or through a nomination.
(iv) The file of candidates shall be reviewed by
the Special Selection Committee which
shall recommend a short list to the Staff
Appointments and Promotions Committee of
persons for appointment as Dean of the School.
(v)

No person shall be eligible for appointment
as Dean unless he/she has been, for the twelve
months preceding the appointment, of or above
the rank of associate professor.

(xi) If the Dean, Deputy Dean or Director does not
intend to renew his/her term of office, the
Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) shall
initiate the process of appointment of a new
Dean, Deputy Dean or Director.

(vi) The Dean shall be subject to an annual
performance appraisal and review undertaken
by the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic
Affairs) who shall provide a report to the Staff
Appointments and Promotions Committee.

(xii) If the Dean or Director intends to renew the
term of office, the Deputy Vice Chancellor
(Academic Affairs) shall submit an assessment
of the performance of the incumbent to
the appropriate Appointments, Promotions
and Review Committee which shall make a
recommendation to the Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee on re-appointment of
the Dean or Director. In the case of a Deputy

(vii) Subject to these Statutes, the Dean of the
School shall hold the initial appointment as
such for three years, and shall be eligible for reappointment for a further term of three years
provided that he/she shall not hold office for a
continuous period exceeding six years.
(viii) If the Dean intends to extend the term of
office, the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic

229

ACT

AND

STATUTES

Affairs) shall submit an assessment of the
performance of the incumbent to the Special
Selection Committee which shall make a
recommendation to the Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee on the reappointment of
the Dean.

(e) From time to time consider the progress and
conduct of the students of the Department
and make regular reports to the Faculty
Board and to the Board of the School of
Graduate Studies;
(f ) Consider other academic matters
determined by the Department.

(ix) Before the completion of the initial three year
term, the Dean shall inform the Deputy Vice
Chancellor of his/her intentions regarding
renewal of the term of office; which intention
shall be recorded in writing at least 60 days prior
to the completion of the said initial three year
term.
(x) If the Dean does not intend to renew the term
of office, the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic
Affairs) shall initiate the process of appointment
of a new Dean.

PART XXXII DEPARTMENTAL BOARDS
77. (i) Every Academic Department shall have a
Departmental Board which shall consist of the
following members:
(a) The Head of the Department, who shall be
Chairperson;
(b) All the full-time members of the academic
staff of the Department;
(c) Not more than three students elected
annually by the students of the Department
from among themselves;
(d) Staff Development
Department;

Fellows

of

the

(e) Such other persons as the Department may
determine from time to time.
(ii) Part-time members of the academic staff may
attend the meeting of the Departmental Board
at the discretion of the Head of Department but
shall have no vote.

(ii) A Departmental Board shall exclude from
its meetings the student members when it
is considering the academic performance
in examinations or otherwise, of individual
students, or when it is discussing the
appointment or promotion of a member of staff
or any other matter relating to a member or
members of staff which a Departmental Board
in its discretion shall consider confidential.
79. Every Departmental Board shall meet at least twice
each semester, but otherwise shall regulate its own
procedure including the creation and establishment
of committees.

(a) Make recommendations for programmes
and courses in the Department;
(b) Consider the general organisation of
programmes and courses of study and
research within the Department and make
recommendations to the Faculty Board and
the Board of the School of Graduate Studies;
(c) Make arrangements for the examination of
each course in the Department and selection
of external examiners for their academic
programmes;
(d) Initiate recruitment and recommend
candidates for appointment to posts within
the Department;

(vii) If the Head of a Department does not intend
to renew his/her term of office, the Dean shall
initiate the process of appointment of a new
Head of Department.

PART XXXIV AFFILIATED AND ASSOCIATE
INSTITUTIONS
81. Affiliated Institutions
(i)

The Council may, on the recommendation of
the Senate, approve the affiliation with the
University of any other institution of teaching
or research situated within or outside Botswana
and may designate it an Affiliated Institution of
the University.

(ii)

In respect of any Affiliated Institution the
Senate shall:

PART XXXIII HEADS OF ACADEMIC DEPARTMENTS
80. (i) The Head of a Department shall participate in
the formulation, implementation and evaluation
of the academic policies of the University
and shall promote academic excellence in the
teaching, research and service programmes
of the University. In addition, the Head of a
Department shall provide academic leadership
to the Department by planning, directing,
and co-coordinating the formulation and
implementation of the academic plans and
programmes of the Department.
(ii) The Head of a Department shall be appointed
by the Vice Chancellor after receiving a
recommendation from the Dean of the
Faculty concerned, who shall make such
recommendation after consulting the fulltime members of the academic staff of the
Department and the Deputy Vice Chancellor
(Academic Affairs).
(iii)

(iii) A
Departmental
Board
may
co-opt
representatives of Departments with related
interests.
78. (i) The functions of a Departmental Board shall be
to:

as

(vii) If the Head of a Department intends to renew
the term of office (which intention shall be
recorded in writing at least 60 days prior to the
completion of the said initial three year term),
the Dean shall, after consultation with the fulltime members of the academic staff and the
Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs), make
a recommendation to the Vice Chancellor on reappointment of the Head of Department.

No person shall be eligible for appointment
as Head of Department unless he/she has
been, for the twelve months preceding his/her
appointment, of or above the rank of senior
lecturer.

(iv) The Head of Department shall be subject to
an annual performance appraisal and review
undertaken by the Dean of the Faculty who shall
provide a report to the Deputy Vice Chancellor
(Academic Affairs).
(v)

Subject to these Statutes, the Head of a
Department shall hold the appointment as
such for three years, and shall be eligible for
reappointment for a further term of three years
provided that he/she shall not hold office for a
continuous period exceeding six years.

(vi) On completion of the second term of office, a
Head of a Department shall not be eligible for
further appointment to the position of Head
of a Department until a three year period has
elapsed.

230

(a)

Advise on and assist in the preparation of
programmes of instruction;

(b) Validate programmes of instruction,
examinations and the granting of
certificates and other awards of the
Affiliated Institutions; and
(d)

Have the right of visitation and inspection
of each institution affiliated to the
University to ensure observance of affiliation
regulations.

(iii) The Senate shall establish a Board of Affiliation
with the following functions:
(a) To consider recommendations concerning
the growth and development of the
Affiliated Institutions;
(b) To consider matters concerning regulations,
syllabi, assessment procedures, and teaching
methods and to make recommendations to
Senate accordingly;
(c) To oversee assessment procedures and to
appoint external examiners;
(d) To deal with any matter of affiliation that
may be delegated by Senate from time to
time;
(e) To receive reports on other matters
concerning Affiliated Institutions;
(f ) To encourage research initiatives in the areas
of educational expertise of the Affiliated
Institutions;
(g) To present periodic reports to Senate;
(h) To consider and recommend examination
results and awards to Senate.

ACT
(iv) The membership of the Board of Affiliation shall
be determined by Senate after consultation
with the governing bodies of the Affiliated
Institutions.
(v) The Director of Academic Development shall be
chairperson of the Board.

82. ASSOCIATE INSTITUTIONS
(i)

The Council may, on the recommendation of
the Senate, designate any academic or research
institution situated within Botswana and
seeking to offer programmes leading to the
award of degrees, diplomas and other awards
of the University of Botswana, an Associate
Institution of the University.

(ii) The award of degrees, diplomas and other
awards of an Associate Institution shall be the
responsibility of, and shall be made by, the
University of Botswana.
(iii) In respect of degrees, diplomas or other awards
to be granted by the University, the University
Senate shall be entirely responsible for approving
programmes and courses of study, regulating
the conduct of examinations, the marking of
examinations, and the granting of such degrees,
diplomas, or awards.
(iv) The governing body of an Associate Institution
shall obtain the approval of the University in
respect of:
(a) The appointment, promotion and review
of academic staff and of Deans and Heads
of Departments who teach courses, or are
responsible for programmes leading to the
awards by the University of Botswana; and
(b) The establishment of Boards for each Faculty
or Department which is responsible for
programmes leading to the awards of the
University of Botswana.

PART XXXV APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND
REVIEW COMMITTEES
83. (i) The appointment, promotion, and annual
appraisal and performance review of every
academic member of staff and of every member
of the support staff of the University shall be
made by an Appointments, Promotions, and
Review Committee.
(ii) Appointments, Promotions, and Review Committees
shall make recommendations for the appointment
or the promotion of staff in accordance with the
provisions of Statutes 34 and 35.

84. FACULTY APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND
REVIEW COMMITTEES
(i) There shall be a Faculty Appointments, Promotions
and Review Committee of each Faculty (in this part
referred to as “the Committee”) which shall consist of
the following members:
(a) The Dean of the Faculty who shall be Chairperson;
and where the Dean is under review, the Deputy
Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) shall be the

AND

STATUTES

Chairperson;

from outside the Institute or Centre.

(b) The Deputy Dean;

(v) No recommendation on the appointment, promotion
or review of academic staff of the University who are
members of an Institute or a Centre which is not part
of a Faculty shall be made by a Faculty Appointments,
Promotions, and Review Committee unless it has
considered every recommendation made to it by an
Appointments, Promotions, and Review Selection
Committee in accordance with Statute 85 (iv).

(c) Heads of Departments;
(d) Two members elected by the Faculty Board;
(e) One professor or associate professor from
each Department, elected by the members of
the Departmental Board; provided where the
Department does not have positions of associate
professor and professor, or the positions are
vacant, the Department shall be represented by
a senior member of the academic staff elected
by members of the Departmental Board;
(f ) At the discretion of the chairperson, not more
than two Professors with special competence
from outside the Faculty; and
(g) The Director
representative.

of

Human

Resources

or

(ii) Subject to such directions as may be given by the
Staff Appointments and Promotions Committee, the
Committee shall recommend the appointment, the
promotion and review of the academic staff of the
Faculty.

86. SUPPORT STAFF APPOINTMENTS,
PROMOTIONS AND REVIEW COMMITTEES
(i) For the purposes of this Statute, the Library and any
other group of staff which Council shall specify, shall
be regarded as Departments and the term Head of
Department shall be correspondingly interpreted.
(ii) Where support staff consists of a cadre confined to
a single Department, there shall be Departmental
Appointments, Promotions, and Review Committees
which shall consist of the following members:
(a) The Head of Department, who shall be
chairperson;
(b) Director of Human Resources or representative;

85. APPOINTMENT, PROMOTION AND REVIEW OF
ACADEMIC STAFF IN INSTITUTES OR CENTRES

(c) Three members of the staff of the Department;
and

(i) The appointment, promotion, or review of academic
staff who are members of a Centre or Institute
which is not part of a Faculty shall be considered
by the Faculty Appointments, Promotions, and
Review Committee of that Faculty which contains
the discipline or academic subject area of the staff
member under consideration.

(d) At the discretion of the chairperson, not more
than four additional members with special
competence from within or outside the
University.

(ii) In such circumstances, the membership of the
Faculty Appointments, Promotions and Review
committee specified under Statute 84 (i) shall be
extended to include the Director of the Institute or
Centre concerned.
(iii) When considering the appointment, promotion
or review of professors of the University who are
members of an Institute or Centre which is not part
of a Faculty, the membership of the Committee
specified under Statute 84 (i) shall be extended to
include a professor or an associate professor of the
Institute or Centre concerned provided where the
Department does not have positions of associate
professor and professor, or the positions are vacant,
the Department shall be represented by a senior
member of the Academic Staff elected by members
of the Departmental Board.
(iv) An Institute or a Centre which is not part of a Faculty
shall have an Appointments, Promotions, and Review
Selection Committee which shall consist of the
following members:
(a) The Director of the Institute or Centre who shall
be the Chairperson;
(b) Three members of the academic staff of the
Institute or Centre elected by the academic staff
of the Institute or Centre;
(c) Two co-opted members with special competence,

231

(iii) Where support staff consist of a common cadre
which is not confined to a single Department,
there shall be for each such cadre a Common Cadre
Appointments, Promotions, and Review Committee
which shall consist of the following members:
(a) The Director, Human Resources, who shall be the
Chairperson;
(b) The Deputy Director
Administration);

(Appointments

and

(c) Two members of the staff belonging to the
common cadre;
(d)

At the discretion of the chairperson, not
more than four additional members with
special competence from within or outside the
University.

(iv) Heads of Departments to, or within which, an
appointment or a promotion of common cadre staff
is to be made shall be invited but only when the
business of their Department is under consideration.

87. SPECIAL APPOINTMENTS
(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of Statutes 84, 85,
and 86, the Vice Chancellor may, in the event that
he/she is satisfied that exceptional circumstances
so require, and on the recommendation of any
academic, support or other unit of the University,
appoint any person as a member of staff of the
University for a period not exceeding twelve (12)

ACT

AND

STATUTES

months.

(ii) The constitution of the Students Representative
Council shall be subject to review and/or
amendment in such manner as the Constitution
provides and/or as directed by Council should
Council find it necessary orexpedient in the
interests of the student body.

(ii) Appointments made under this provision shall be
reported periodically to the Staff Appointments and
Promotions Committee.

(iii) The function of the Students Representative
Council shall be:

88. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Where a spouse or relation of a member of
Appointments, Promotions Review Committee,
constituted under these Statutes is a candidate for
appointment or promotion under consideration by
the Committee, the member concerned shall recuse
himself/ herself from any further consideration of
the matter. Where the Chairperson is recused in
accordance with the provisions hereof, another
member shall be elected to preside. Heads of
Departments, where recused, must be represented by
a senior member of staff of the Department.
(ii) Subject to Statute 87, no appointment shall be
made to any vacant post within the approved
establishment of any Department of the University
unless the vacancy which exists has been advertised
publicly for a reasonable period in such a manner as
the Council shall determine.

PART XXXVI TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE
OF MEMBERS OF UNIVERSITY STAFF
89. (i) Subject to these Statutes, an employee of the
University shall hold his/ her appointment upon
such terms and conditions of service as the
Council shall in each case determine.

(b) To develop the intellectual, cultural, social
and sporting life of the students; and
(c) To foster the corporate spirit of the students.
93. Subject to the observance by them of the Statutes
and of regulations prescribed under these Statutes,
the students shall enjoy all the privileges and
facilities available to them in the University.

PART XXXVIII SECURITY
94. The University reserves the right, through Ordinances
and/or Regulations, to implement measures to
control and to regulate access to, and movement
within, its buildings and premises, and to promulgate
such other regulations as may be required to
establish and maintain good order, and to protect
persons and property provided that such measures
shall at all times be consistent with the preservation
of individual rights of movement, association and
privacy.

(ii) The terms and conditions of service of every
employee of the University shall be sent out in a
written contract of service.

PART XXXIX ORDINANCES/REGULATIONS

(iii)

95.

Without prejudice to the foregoing, every
member of staff of the University shall be
subject to the general authority of the Council
and of the Vice Chancellor.

90. Every contract of service between the University and
an employee of the University shall contain or be
deemed to contain a provision that the contract is
subject to the Employment Act, University Act and
Statutes, and to all regulations made hereunder.
91. Where an employee of the University is convicted by
a court within or outside Botswana, of an offence
which is a criminal offence under the laws of
Botswana and in consequence thereof is sentenced to
imprisonment, whether in respect of the nonpayment
of a fine imposed for the offence or otherwise, such
employee shall receive no emoluments in respect
of the period of detention in prison in execution of
that sentence unless the Council otherwise directs.
In addition to the aforegoing such conviction shall
render the employee liable for immediate termination
in respect thereof.

PART XXXVII STUDENTS REPRESENTATIVE
COUNCIL
92.

(a) To represent the students in their relations
with the authorities of the University and
other relevant bodies;

(i) The affairs of the students of the University
shall be governed by a Students Representative
Council.

(i) Subject to the Act and the Statutes, the
Council may make Ordinances/ Regulations
prescribing any matter which, in the opinion of
Council, is appropriate to be prescribed for the
better carrying out of the University’s functions
and in furtherance of these Statutes.
(ii) Ordinances/Regulations may provide such
information, activities or acts as, in the opinion
of the Council, may be appropriate.
(iii) The Council may at any time amend or repeal
any Ordinance/ Regulation.
(iv) Ordinances/Regulations need not be published
in the Calendar, but the Council shall publish
them in such a manner as the Council considers
will best make them known to the persons to
whom they apply.

PART XXXX AMENDMENTS TO STATUTES
96. Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 23 of
the Act, the Council shall not amend, or revoke any
Statute which, in the opinion of the Council, affects
academic matters without first consulting the Senate
and considering any representations the Senate may
make upon such Statute, amendment, or revocation
as the case may be.

232

University of Botswana
Private Bag UB 0022
Gaborone, Botswana
Tel: (+267) 355-0000
(Switchboard)
(+267) 355+Extension
Fax (+267)395-6591
Website: www.ub.bw
Produced by:
Department of Public Affairs
Private Bag 0022
Gaborone Botswana
Tel: (+267)355 2284
Fax: (+267)3912420
Design and Layout: PA Graphics

233

